---

author: ["Robert Galbraith"]
title: "The Cuckoos Calling - index_split_035.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Robert Galbraith - The Cuckoos Calling"
tags: ["said", "rochelle", "strike", "yeah", "lula", "like", "wuz", "got", "robin", "time", "know", "see", "kieran", "would", "back", "er", "come", "go", "black", "meet", "one", "found", "told", "though", "people"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI DUO]
url: /posts/robertgalbraith/TheCuckoosCalling-indexsplit035html

---


The Cuckoo's Calling
8WHEN
ROBIN
ARRIVED
NEXT
MORNING, it was, for the second time, to a locked glass door. She let herself in with the spare key that Strike had now entrusted to her, approached the closed inner door and stood silent, listening. After a few seconds, she heard the faintly muffled but unmistakable sound of deep snoring. This presented her with a delicate problem, because of their tacit agreement not to mention Strike’s camp bed, or any of the other signs of habitation lying around the place. On the other hand, Robin had something of an urgent nature to communicate to her temporary boss. She hesitated, considering her options. The easiest route would be to try and wake Strike by clattering around the outer office, thereby giving him time to organize himself and the inner room, but that might take too long: her news would not keep. Robin therefore took a deep breath and rapped on the door.Strike woke instantly. For one disoriented moment he lay there, registering the reproachful daylight pouring through the window. Then he remembered setting down the mobile phone after reading Charlotte’s text, and knew that he had forgotten to set the alarm.“Don’t come in!” he bellowed.“Would you like a cup of tea?” Robin called through the door.“Yeah—yeah, that’d be great. I’ll come out there for it,” Strike added loudly, wishing, for the first time, that he had fitted a lock on the inner door. His false foot and calf was standing propped against the wall, and he was wearing nothing but boxer shorts.Robin hurried away to fill the kettle, and Strike fought his way out of his sleeping bag. He dressed at speed, making a clumsy job of putting on the prosthesis, folding the camp bed into its corner, pushing the desk back into place. Ten minutes after she had knocked on the door, he limped into the outer office smelling strongly of deodorant, to find Robin at her desk, looking very excited about something.“Your tea,” she said, indicating a steaming mug.“Great, thanks. Just give me a moment,” he said, and he left to pee in the bathroom on the landing. As he zipped up his fly, he caught sight of himself in the mirror, crumpled-looking and unshaven. Not for the first time, he consoled himself that his hair looked the same whether brushed or unbrushed.“I’ve got news,” said Robin, when he had re-entered the office through the glass door and, with reiterated thanks, picked up his mug of tea.“Yeah?”“I’ve found Rochelle Onifade.”He lowered the mug.“You’re kidding. How the hell…?”“I saw in the file that she was supposed to attend an outpatient clinic at St. Thomas’s,” said Robin excitedly, flushed and talking fast, “so I rang up the hospital yesterday evening, pretending to be her, and I said I’d forgotten the time of my appointment, and they told me it’s at ten thirty on Thursday morning. You’ve got,” she glanced at her computer monitor, “fifty-five minutes.”Why had he not thought to tell her to do this?“You genius, you bloody genius…”He had slopped hot tea over his hand, and put the mug down on her desk.“D’you know exactly…?”“It’s in the psychiatric unit round the back of the main building,” said Robin, exhilarated. “See, you go in off Grantley Road, there’s a second car park…”She had turned the monitor towards him to show him the map of St. Thomas’s. He checked his wrist, but his watch was still in the inner room.“You’ll have time if you leave now,” Robin urged him.“Yeah—I’ll get my stuff.”Strike hurried to fetch his watch, wallet, cigarettes and phone. He was almost through the glass door, cramming his wallet into his back pocket, when Robin said:“Er—Cormoran…”She had never called him by his first name before. Strike assumed that this accounted for her slight air of bashfulness; then he realized that she was pointing meaningfully at his navel. Looking down, he saw that he had done up the buttons on his shirt wrongly, and was exposing a patch of belly so hairy that it resembled black coconut matting.“Oh—right—cheers…”Robin turned her attention politely to her monitor while he undid and refastened the buttons.“See you later.”“Yeah, ’bye,” she said, smiling at him as he departed at speed; but within seconds he was back, panting slightly.“Robin, I need you to check something.”She already had the pen in her hand, waiting.“There was a legal conference in Oxford on the seventh of January. Lula Landry’s uncle Tony attended it. International family law. Anything you can find out. Specifically about him being there.”“Right,” said Robin, scribbling.“Cheers. You’re a genius.”And he was gone, with uneven steps, down the metal stairs.Though she hummed to herself as she settled down at her desk, a little of Robin’s cheerfulness drained away as she drank her tea. She had half hoped that Strike would invite her along to meet Rochelle Onifade, whose shadow she had hunted for two weeks.Rush hour past, the crowds on the Tube had thinned. Strike was pleased, because the end of his stump was still smarting, to find a seat with ease. He had bought himself a pack of Extra Strong Mints at the station kiosk before boarding his train, and was now sucking four simultaneously, trying to conceal the fact that he had not had time to clean his teeth. His toothbrush and toothpaste were hidden inside his kitbag, even though it would have been much more convenient to leave them on the chipped sink in the bathroom. Catching sight of himself again, in the darkened train window, with his heavy stubble and his generally unkempt appearance, he asked himself why, when it was perfectly obvious that Robin knew he slept there, he maintained the fiction that he had some other home.Strike’s memory and map sense were more than adequate to the task of locating the entrance to the psychiatric unit at St. Thomas’s, and he proceeded there without mishap, arriving at shortly after ten. He spent five minutes checking that the automatic double doors were the only entrance on Grantley Road, before positioning himself on a stone wall in the car park, some twenty yards away from the entrance, giving him a clear view of everyone entering and leaving.Knowing only that the girl he sought was probably homeless, and certainly black, he had thought through his strategy for finding her on the Tube, and concluded that there was really only one option open to him. At twenty past ten, therefore, when he saw a tall, thin black girl walking briskly towards the entrance, he called out (even though she looked too well-groomed, too neatly dressed):“Rochelle!”She glanced up to see who had shouted, but kept walking without any sign that the name had a personal application, and disappeared into the building. Next came a couple, both white; then a group of people of assorted ages and races whom Strike guessed to be hospital workers; but on the mere off-chance he called again:“Rochelle!”Some of them glanced at him, but returned immediately to their conversations. Consoling himself that frequenters of this entrance were probably used to a degree of eccentricity in those they met in its vicinity, Strike lit a cigarette and waited.Half past ten passed, and no black girl went through the doors. Either she had missed her appointment, or she had used a different entrance. A feather-light breeze tickled the back of his neck as he sat smoking, watching, waiting. The hospital building was enormous, a vast concrete box with rectangular windows; there were surely numerous entrances on every side.Strike straightened his injured leg, which was still sore, and considered, again, the possibility that he would have to return to see his consultant. He found even this degree of proximity to a hospital slightly depressing. His stomach rumbled. He had passed a McDonald’s on the way here. If he had not found her by midday, he would go and eat there.Twice more he shouted “Rochelle!” at black women who entered and exited the building, and both times they glanced back, purely to see who had shouted, in one case giving him a look of disdain.Then, just after eleven, a short, stocky black girl emerged from the hospital with a slightly awkward, rocking, side-to-side gait. He knew quite well that he had not missed her going in, not only because of her distinctive walk, but because she wore a very noticeable short coat of magenta-colored fake fur, which flattered neither her height nor her breadth.“Rochelle!”The girl stopped, turned and stared around, scowling, looking for the person who had called her name. Strike limped towards her, and she glared at him with an understandable mistrust.“Rochelle? Rochelle Onifade? Hi. My name’s Cormoran Strike. Can I have a word?”“I always come in Redbourne Street entrance,” she told him five minutes later, after he had given a garbled and fictitious account of the way he had found her. “I come out this way ’cause I was gonna go to McDonald’s.”So that was where they went. Strike bought two coffees and two large cookies, and carried them to the window table where Rochelle was waiting, curious and suspicious.She was uncompromisingly plain. Her greasy skin, which was the color of burned earth, was covered in acne pustules and pits; her small eyes were deep-set and her teeth were crooked and rather yellow. The chemically straightened hair showed four inches of black roots, then six inches of harsh, coppery wire-red. Her tight, too-short jeans, her shiny gray handbag and her bright white trainers looked cheap. However, the squashy fake-fur jacket, garish and unflattering though Strike found it, was of a different quality altogether: fully lined, as he saw when she took it off, with a patterned silk, and bearing the label not (as he had expected, remembering Lula Landry’s email to the designer) of Guy Somé, but of an Italian of whom even Strike had heard.“You sure you inna journalist?” she asked, in her low, husky voice.Strike had already spent some time outside the hospital trying to establish his bona fides in this respect.“No, I’m not a journalist. Like I said, I know Lula’s brother.”“You a friend of his?”“Yeah. Well, not exactly a friend. He’s hired me. I’m a private detective.”She was instantly, openly scared.“Whaddayuhwanna talk to me for?”“There’s nothing to worry about…”“Whyd’yuhwanna talk to me, though?”“It’s nothing bad. John isn’t sure that Lula committed suicide, that’s all.”He guessed that the only thing keeping her in the seat was her terror of the construction he might put on instant flight. Her fear was out of all proportion to his manner or words.“There’s nothing to worry about,” he assured her again. “John wants me to take another look at the circumstances, that’s—”“Does ’e say I’ve got something to do wiv ’er dying?”“No, of course not. I’m just hoping you might be able to tell me about her state of mind, what she got up to in the lead-up to her death. You saw her regularly, didn’t you? I thought you might be able to tell me what was going on in her life.”Rochelle made as though to speak, then changed her mind and attempted to drink her scalding coffee instead.“So, what—’er brother’s trying to make out she never killed ’erself? What, like she was pushed out the window?”“He thinks it’s possible.”She seemed to be trying to fathom something, to work it out in her head.“I don’t ’ave to talk to you. You ain’t real police.”“Yeah, that’s true. But wouldn’t you like to help find out what—”“She jumped,” declared Rochelle Onifade firmly.“What makes you so sure?” asked Strike.“I jus’ know.”“It seems to have come as a shock to nearly everyone else she knew.”“She wuz depressed. Yeah, she wuz on stuff for it. Like me. Sometimes it jus’ takes you over. It’s an illness,” she said, although she made the words sound like “it’s uh nillness.”Nillness, thought Strike, for a second distracted. He had slept badly. Nillness, that was where Lula Landry had gone, and where all of them, he and Rochelle included, were headed. Sometimes illness turned slowly to nillness, as was happening to Bristow’s mother…sometimes nillness rose to meet you out of nowhere, like a concrete road slamming your skull apart. He was sure that if he took out his notebook, she would clam up, or leave. He therefore continued to ask questions as casually as he could manage, asking her how she had come to attend the clinic, how she had first met Lula.Still immensely suspicious, she gave monosyllabic answers at first, but slowly, gradually, she became more forthcoming. Her own history was pitiful. Early abuse, care, severe mental illness, foster homes and violent outbursts culminating, at sixteen, in homelessness. She had secured proper treatment as the indirect result of being hit by a car. Hospitalized when her bizarre behavior had made treating her physical wounds nearly impossible, a psychiatrist had at last been called in. She was on drugs now, which, when she took them, greatly eased her symptoms. Strike found it pathetic, and touching, that the outpatient clinic where she had met Lula Landry seemed to have become, for Rochelle, the highlight of her week. She spoke with some affection of the young psychiatrist who ran the group.“So that’s where you met Lula?”“Di’n’t her brother tell ya?”“He was vague on the details.”“Yeah, she come to our group. She wuz referred.”“And you got talking?”“Yeah.”“You became friends?”“Yeah.”“You visited her at home? Swam in the pool?”“Why shou’n’t I?”“No reason. I’m only asking.”She thawed very slightly.“I don’t like swimming. I don’t like water over m’face. I went in the jacuzzi. And we went shoppin’ an’ stuff.”“Did she ever talk to you about her neighbors; the other people in her building?”“Them Bestiguis? A bit. She din’ like them. That woman’s a bitch,” said Rochelle, with sudden savagery.“What makes you say that?”“Have you met ’er? She look at me like I wuz dirt.”“What did Lula think of her?”“She din’ like ’er neither, nor her husband. He’s a creep.”“In what way?”“He jus’ is,” said Rochelle, impatiently; but then, when Strike did not speak, she went on. “He wuz always tryin’ ter get her downstairs when his wife wuz out.”“Did Lula ever go?”“No fuckin’ chance,” said Rochelle.“You and Lula talked to each other a lot, I suppose, did you?”“Yeah, we did, at f—Yeah, we did.”She looked out of the window. A sudden shower of rain had caught passersby unawares. Transparent ellipses peppered the glass beside them.“At first?” said Strike. “Did you talk less as time went on?”“I’m gonna have to go soon,” said Rochelle, grandly. “I got things to do.”“People like Lula,” said Strike, feeling his way, “can be spoiled. Treat people badly. They’re used to getting their own—”“I ain’t no one’s servant,” said Rochelle fiercely.“Maybe that’s why she liked you? Maybe she saw you as someone more equal—not a hanger-on?”“Yeah, igzactly,” said Rochelle, mollified. “I weren’t impressed by her.”“You can see why she’d want you as a friend, someone more down-to-earth…”“Yeah.”“…and you had your illness in common, didn’t you? So you understood her on a level most people wouldn’t.”“And I’m black,” said Rochelle, “and she wuz wanting to feel proper black.”“Did she talk to you about that?”“Yeah, ’course,” said Rochelle. “She wuz wanting to find out where she come from, where she belong.”“Did she talk to you about trying to find the black side of her family?”“Yeah, of course. And she…yeah.”She had braked almost visibly.“Did she ever find anyone? Her father?”“No. She never found ’im. No fuckin’ chance.”“Really?”“Yeah, really.”
She began eating fast. Strike was afraid that she would leave the moment she had finished.“Was Lula depressed when you met her at Vashti, the day before she died?”“Yeah, she wuz.”“Did she tell you why?”“There don’t ’ave to be a reason why. It’s uh nillness.”“But she told you she was feeling bad, did she?”“Yeah,” she said, after a fractional hesitation.“You were supposed to be having lunch together, weren’t you?” he asked. “Kieran told me that he drove her to meet you. You know Kieran, right? Kieran Kolovas-Jones?”Her expression softened; the corners of her mouth lifted.“Yeah, I know Kieran. Yeah, she come to meet me at Vashti.”“But she didn’t stop for lunch?”“No. She wuz in a hurry,” said Rochelle.She bowed her head to drink more coffee, concealing her face.“Why didn’t she just ring you? You’ve got a phone, have you?”“Yeah, I gotta phone,” she snapped, bristling, and drew from the fur jacket a basic-looking Nokia, stuck all over with gaudy pink crystals.“So why d’you think she didn’t call to say she couldn’t see you?”Rochelle glowered at him.“Because she didn’t like using the phone, because of them listenin’ in.”“Journalists?”“Yeah.”She had almost finished her cookie.“Journalists wouldn’t have been very interested in her saying that she wasn’t coming to Vashti, though, would they?”“I dunno.”“Didn’t you think it was odd, at the time, that she drove all the way to tell you she couldn’t stay for lunch?”“Yeah. No,” said Rochelle. And then, with a sudden burst of fluency:“When ya gotta driver it don’t matter, does it? You jus’ go wherever you want, don’t cost you nothing extra, you just get them to take you, don’t ya? She was passing, so she come in to tell me she wasn’t gonna stop because she ’ad to get ’ome to see fucking Ciara Porter.”Rochelle looked as though she regretted the traitorous “fucking” as soon as it was out, and pursed her lips together as though to ensure no more swear words escaped her.“And that was all she did, was it? She came into the shop, said ‘I can’t stop, I’ve got to get home and see Ciara’ and left?”“Yeah. More uh less,” said Rochelle.“Kieran says they usually gave you a lift home after you’d been out together.”“Yeah,” she said. “Well. She wuz too busy that day, weren’ she?”Rochelle did a poor job of masking her resentment.“Talk me through what happened in the shop. Did either of you try anything on?”“Yeah,” said Rochelle, after a pause. “She did.” Another hesitation. “Long Alexander McQueen dress. He killed hiself and all,” she added, in a distant voice.“Did you go into the changing room with her?”“Yeah.”“What happened in the changing room?” prompted Strike.Her eyes reminded him of those of a bull he had once come face to face with as a small boy: deep-set, deceptively stoic, unfathomable.“She put on the dress,” said Rochelle.“She didn’t do anything else? Didn’t call anyone?”“No. Well, yeah. She mighta.”“D’you know who she called?”“I can’t remember.”She drank, obscuring her face again with the paper cup.“Was it Evan Duffield?”“It mighta bin.”“Can you remember what she said?”“No.”“One of the shop assistants overheard her, while she was on the phone. She seemed to be making an appointment to meet someone at her flat much later. In the early hours of the morning, the girl thought.”“Yeah?”“So that doesn’t seem like it could have been Duffield, does it, seeing as she already had an arrangement to meet him at Uzi?”“Know a lot, don’t you?” she said.“Everyone knows they met at Uzi that night,” said Strike. “It was in all the papers.”The dilating or contracting of Rochelle’s pupils would be almost impossible to see, because of the virtually black irises surrounding them.“Yeah, I s’pose,” she conceded.“Was it Deeby Macc?”“No!” She yelped it on a laugh. “She din’ know his number.”“Famous people can nearly always get each other’s numbers,” said Strike.Rochelle’s expression clouded. She glanced down at the blank screen on her gaudy pink mobile.“I don’ think she had his,” she said.“But you heard her trying to make an arrangement to meet someone in the small hours?”“No,” said Rochelle, avoiding his eyes, swilling the dregs of her coffee around the paper cup. “I can’ remember nuthin’ like that.”“You understand how important this could be?” said Strike, careful to keep his tone unthreatening. “If Lula made an arrangement to meet someone at the time she died? The police never knew about this, did they? You never told them?”“I gotta go,” she said, throwing down the last morsel of cookie, grabbing the strap of her cheap handbag and glaring at him.Strike said:“It’s nearly lunchtime. Can I buy you anything else?”“No.”But she did not move. He wondered how poor she was, whether she ate regularly or not. There was something about her, beneath the surliness, that he found touching: a fierce pride, a vulnerability.“Yeah, all right then,” she said, dropping her handbag and slumping back on to the hard chair. “I’ll have a Big Mac.”He was afraid she might leave while he was at the counter, but when he returned with two trays, she was still there; she even thanked him grudgingly.Strike tried a different tack.“You know Kieran quite well, do you?” he asked, pursuing the glow that had illuminated her at the mention of his name.“Yeah,” she said, self-consciously. “I met him a lot with ’er. ’E wuz always driving ’er.”“He says that Lula was writing something in the back of the car, before she arrived at Vashti. Did she show you, or give you, anything she’d written?”“No,” she said. She crammed fries into her mouth and then said, “I ain’t seen nuthin like that. Why, what was it?”“I don’t know.”“Maybe it were a shopping list or something?”“Yeah, that’s what the police thought. You’re sure you didn’t notice her carrying a bit of paper, a letter, an envelope?”“Yeah, I’m sure. Kieran know you’re meeting me?” asked Rochelle.“Yeah, I told him you were on my list. He told me you used to live at St. Elmo’s.”This seemed to please her.“Where are you living now?”“What’s it to you?” she demanded, suddenly fierce.“It’s nothing to me. I’m just making polite conversation.”This drew a small snort from Rochelle.“I got my own place in Hammersmith now.”She chewed for a while and then, for the first time, proffered unsolicited information.“We usedta listen to Deeby Macc in his car. Me, Kieran and Lula.”And she began to rap:
No hydroquinone, black to the backbone,
Takin’ Deeby lightly, better buy an early tombstone,
I’m drivin’ my Ferrari—fuck Johari—got my head on straight
Nothin’ talks like money talks—I’m shoutin’ at ya, Mister Jake.
She looked proud, as though she had put him firmly in his place, with no retort possible.“Tha’s from ‘Hydroquinone,’ ” she said. “On Jake On My Jack.”
“What’s hydroquinone?” Strike asked.“Skin light’ner. We usedta rap that with the car windows down,” said Rochelle. A warm, reminiscent smile lit her face out of plainness.“Lula was looking forward to meeting Deeby Macc, then, was she?”“Yeah, she wuz,” said Rochelle. “She knew ’e liked ’er, she wuz pleased with herself about that. Kieran wuz proper excited an’ all, he kep’ askin’ Lula to introduce him. He wanted to meet Deeby.”Her smile faded; she picked morosely at her burger, then said:“Is that all you wanna know, then? ’Cause I gotta go.”She began wolfing the remnants of her meal, cramming food into her mouth.“Lula must have taken you to a lot of places, did she?”“Yeah,” said Rochelle, her mouth full of burger.“Did you go to Uzi with her?”“Yeah. Once.”She swallowed, and began to talk about the other places she had seen during the early phase of her friendship with Lula, which (in spite of Rochelle’s determined attempts to repudiate any suggestion that she had been dazzled by the lifestyle of a multimillionairess) had all the romance of a fairy tale. Lula had snatched Rochelle away from the bleak world of her hostel and group therapy and swept her, once a week, into a whirl of expensive fun. Strike noted how very little Rochelle had told him about Lula the person, as opposed to Lula the holder of the magic plastic cards that bought handbags, jackets and jewelry, and the necessary means by which Kieran appeared regularly, like a genie, to whisk Rochelle away from her hostel. She described, in loving detail, the presents Lula had bought her, shops to which Lula had taken her, restaurants and bars to which they had gone together, places lined with celebrities. None of these, however, seemed to have impressed Rochelle in the slightest; for every name she mentioned there was a deprecating remark:“ ’E wuz a dick.” “She’s plastic all over.” “They ain’t nuthing special.”“Did you meet Evan Duffield?” Strike asked.“ ’Im.” The monosyllable was heavy with contempt. “ ’E’s a twat.”“Is he?”“Yeah, ’e is. Ask Kieran.”She gave the impression that she and Kieran stood together, sane, dispassionate observers of the idiots populating Lula’s world.“In what way was he a twat?”“ ’E treated ’er like shit.”“Like how?”“Sold stories,” said Rochelle, reaching for the last of her fries. “One time she tested ev’ryone. Told us all a diff’rent story to see which ones got in the papers. I wuz the only one who kep’ their mouf shut, ev’ryone else blabbed.”“Who’d she test?”“Ciara Porter. ’Im, Duffield. That Guy Summy,” Rochelle pronounced his first name to rhyme with “die,” “but then she reckoned it wasn’t ’im. Made excuses for ’im. But ’e used ’er as much as anyone.”“In what way?”“He di’n’t want ’er to work for anyone else. Wanted ’er to do it all for ’is company, get ’im all the publicity.”“So, after she’d found out she could trust you…”“Yeah, then she bought me the phone.”There was a missed beat.“So she cud get in touch wiv me whenever she wanted.”She swept the sparkling pink Nokia suddenly off the table and stuffed it deep into the pocket of her squashy pink coat.“I suppose you’ve had to take over the charges yourself now?” Strike asked.He thought that she was going to tell him to mind his own business, but instead she said:“ ’Er family ’asn’t noticed they’re still payin’ for it.”And this thought seemed to give her a slightly malicious pleasure.“Did Lula buy you that jacket?” Strike asked.“No,” she snapped, furiously defensive. “I got this myself, I’m working now.”“Really? Where are you working?”“Whut’s it to you?” she demanded again.“I’m showing polite interest.”A tiny, brief smile touched the wide mouth, and she relented again.“I’m doing afternoons in a shop up the road from my new place.”“Are you in another hostel?”“No,” she said, and he sensed again the digging in, the refusal to go further that he would push at his peril. He changed tack.“It must have been a shock to you when Lula died, was it?”“Yeah. It wuz,” she said, thoughtlessly; then, realizing what she had said, she backtracked. “I knew she wuz depressed, but you never ’spect people tuh do that.”“So you wouldn’t say she was suicidal when you saw her that day?”“I dunno. I never saw ’er for long enough, did I?”“Where were you when you heard she’d died?”“I wuz in the hostel. Loadsa people knew I knew her. Janine woke me up and told me.”“And your immediate thought was that it was suicide?”“Yeah. An’ I gotta go now. I gotta go.”She had made up her mind and he could see that he was not going to be able to stop her. After wriggling back into the ludicrous fur jacket, she hoisted her handbag onto her shoulder.“Say hullo to Kieran for me.”“Yeah, I will.”“See yuh.”She waddled out of the restaurant without a backward glance.Strike watched her walk past the window, her head down, her brows knitted, until she passed out of sight. It had stopped raining. Idly he pulled her tray towards him and finished her last few fries.Then he stood up so abruptly that the baseball-capped girl who had been approaching his table to clear and wipe it jumped back a step with a little cry of surprise. Strike hurried out of the McDonald’s and off up Grantley Road.Rochelle was standing on the corner, clearly visible in her furry magenta coat, part of a knot of people waiting for the lights to change at a pedestrian crossing. She was gabbling into the pink jeweled Nokia. Strike caught up with her, insinuating himself into the group behind her, making of his bulk a weapon, so that people moved aside to avoid him.“…wanted to know who she was arrangin’ to meet that night…yeah, an’—”Rochelle turned her head, watching traffic, and realized that Strike was right behind her. Removing the mobile from her ear, she jabbed at a button, cutting the call.“What?” she asked him aggressively.“Who were you calling then?”“Mind yer own fuckin’ business!” she said furiously. The waiting pedestrians stared. “Are you followin’ me?”“Yeah,” said Strike. “Listen.”The lights changed; they were the only two not to start off over the road, and were jostled by the passing walkers.“Will you give me your mobile number?”The implacable bull’s eyes looked back at him, unreadable, bland, secretive.“Wha’ for?”“Kieran asked me to get it,” he lied. “I forgot. He thinks you left a pair of sunglasses in his car.”He did not think she was convinced, but after a moment she dictated a number, which he wrote down on the back of one of his own cards.“That all?” she asked aggressively, and she proceeded across the road as far as an island, where the lights changed again. Strike limped after her. She looked both angry and perturbed by his continuing presence.“What?”
“I think you know something you’re not telling me, Rochelle.” She glared at him.“Take this,” said Strike, pulling a second card out of his overcoat pocket. “If you think of anything you’d like to tell me, call, all right? Call that mobile number.”She did not answer.“If Lula was murdered,” said Strike, while the cars whooshed by them, and rain glittered in the gutters at their feet, “and you know something, you could be in danger from the killer too.”This evoked a tiny, complacent, scathing smile. Rochelle did not think she was in danger. She thought she was safe.The green man had appeared. Rochelle gave a toss of her dry, wiry hair and moved away across the road, ordinary, squat and plain, still clutching her mobile in one hand and Strike’s card in the other. Strike stood alone on the island, watching her with a feeling of impotence and unease. She might never have sold her story to the newspapers, but he could not believe that she had bought that designer jacket, ugly though he found it, from the proceeds of a job in a shop.
