---

author: ["Robert Galbraith"]
title: "The Running Grave - chapter004"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Robert Galbraith - The Running Grave"
tags: ["said", "sir", "colin", "strike", "church", "kevin", "uhc", "robin", "u", "ed", "sally", "like", "got", "told", "think", "family", "one", "people", "year", "james", "tried", "last", "made", "chapman", "farm"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI DUO]
url: /posts/robertgalbraith/TheRunningGrave-chapter004

---


The Running Grave
4
Nine in the third place means:
When tempers flare up in the family,
Too great severity brings remorse.
The I Ching or Book of Changes
At eleven o’clock on the last Tuesday in February, Strike and Robin travelled together by taxi from their office to the Reform Club, a large, grey nineteenth-century building that stood on Pall Mall.
‘Sir Colin’s in the coffee room,’ said the tailcoated attendant who took their names at the door, and led them across the vast atrium. Robin, who’d thought she looked reasonably smart in black trousers and a sweater, which would also work for her surveillance job later, now felt slightly underdressed. White marble busts stood sentinel on square plinths and large oil paintings of eminent Whigs looked benignly down from gold frames, while columns of fluted stone rose from the tiled floor to the first-floor balcony, then up to a vaulted glass ceiling.
The coffee room, which had implied a small and cosy space, proved to be an equally grand dining room, with green, red and gold walls, long windows and gilt chandeliers with frosted glass globes. Only one table was occupied, and Robin recognised their potential client at once, because she’d looked him up the previous evening.
Sir Colin Edensor, who’d been born into a working-class family in Manchester, had enjoyed a distinguished career in the civil service, which had culminated in a knighthood. Now patron of several charities concerned with education and child welfare, he had a quiet reputation for intelligence and integrity. Over the past twelve months his name, which had hitherto appeared only in broadsheets, had found its way into the tabloids, because Edensor’s scathing remarks about the Universal Humanitarian Church had drawn fire from a wide range of people, including a famous actress, a respected author and sundry pop culture journalists, all of whom depicted Edensor as a rich man furious that his son was squandering his trust fund to help the poor.
Sir Colin’s wealth had come to him through his marriage to the daughter of a man who’d made many millions from a chain of clothing stores. The couple appeared to have been happy together given that the marriage had lasted forty years. Sally had died barely two months previously, leaving behind three sons, of whom William was the youngest by ten years. Robin assumed the two men sitting with Sir Colin were his elder sons.
‘Your guests, Sir Colin,’ said the attendant, without actually bowing, though his tone was hushed and deferential.
‘Good morning,’ said Sir Colin, smiling as he got to his feet and shook hands with the detectives in turn.
Their prospective client had a thick head of grey hair and the sort of face that engenders liking and trust. There were laughter lines on his face, his mouth was naturally upturned at the corners and the brown eyes behind his gold-rimmed bifocals were warm. His accent was still perceptibly Mancunian.
‘These are Will’s brothers, James and Edward.’
James Edensor, who resembled his father, except that his hair was dark brown and he looked rather less good-humoured, stood up to shake hands, whereas Edward, who had blond hair and large blue eyes, remained seated. Robin noticed a scar running down Edward’s temple. A walking stick was propped against his chair.
‘It’s very good of you to see us,’ said Sir Colin, when all had sat down. ‘Would you like anything to drink?’
When Strike and Robin declined, Sir Colin cleared his throat slightly, then said,
‘Well… I should probably start by saying I’m not sure you’re going to be able to help us. As I told you over the phone, we’ve already tried using private detectives, which didn’t go well. It might even have made things worse. However, you were highly recommended to me by the Chiswell family, who I know of old. Izzy assured me that if you didn’t think you’d be able to help, you’d tell me so at once – which I thought a high compliment.’
‘We certainly don’t take cases we consider hopeless,’ said Strike.
‘In that case,’ said Sir Colin, putting his fingers together, ‘I’ll outline the situation and you can give me your expert opinion. Yes, please, go ahead,’ he added, answering Strike’s unasked question as the detective reached for his notebook.
Even if he hadn’t known Sir Colin’s previous profession, Strike would’ve known he was a man well-practised in giving information in an organised, cogent fashion, so he merely readied his pen.
‘I think it’s best to start with Will,’ said the civil servant. ‘He’s our youngest child and he was – I don’t like to say an accident, but Sally was forty-four when she fell pregnant with him and didn’t realise for quite a while. But we were delighted, once we got over the shock.’
‘James and I weren’t,’ interjected Edward. ‘Nobody likes to think their forty-something parents are up to that when they’re not looking.’
Sir Colin smiled.
‘All right, well, let’s just say it was a shock all round,’ he resumed. ‘But we all doted on Will once he’d arrived. He was a lovely little boy. Will’s always been very clever, but by the time he was six or seven we were worried there was something slightly off. He had passionate enthusiasms – obsessions, you might almost say – and disliked upsets to his routine. Things other children took in their stride unsettled him. He didn’t like big groups. At children’s parties he’d be found upstairs quietly reading or playing on his own. We were a little bit anxious about him, so we took him to see a psychologist and he was diagnosed as being on the mild end of the autistic spectrum. We were told it was nothing dramatic, nothing serious. The psychologist also told us he’s got a very high IQ. That wasn’t really a surprise: his ability to process information and his recall were both extraordinary and his reading age was at least five years ahead of his actual one.
‘I’m telling you all this,’ Sir Colin went on, ‘because I believe Will’s particular combination of abilities and quirks explain, at least partially, how the UHC was able to recruit him. There’d been a previous incident which worried us a lot, and which should have been a warning.
‘When Will was fourteen he fell in with a couple of boys at school who told him they were radical socialists, waging a kind of general war on authority. Will was quite vulnerable to people who seemed to like him, because at that point he’d never had many very close friends. He bought into their philosophy of general disruption and started reading all sorts of socialist theory. Only when they convinced him to set fire to the chapel did we realise what was going on. He came within a hair’s breadth of being expelled, and only a late-stage admission from a schoolmate saved him. She knew these boys were perpetuating a tease on Will for the fun of seeing how far they could persuade him to go.
‘We sat him down after that, Sally and I,’ said Sir Colin, ‘and had a very long talk with him. It became clear to us that Will had difficulty telling when people might be duplicitous. He’s quite black and white and expects other people to be as straightforward as he is, which was an irresistible temptation to the boys who put him up to arson.
‘That incident aside, though, Will never got in trouble, and the older he got, the more easily he seemed to make friends. Characteristically, he went and bought books to research autism, and he could be very funny about it. By the time he came to his final year at school, Sally and I were confident he’d be fine at university. He’d already proven he could make good friends and his grades were outstanding.’
Sir Colin took a sip of coffee. Strike, who appreciated the way in which the civil servant was relating the information, posed no questions, but waited for him to continue.
‘Then,’ Sir Colin said, setting down his cup, ‘three months before Will was due to leave for Durham, Ed was involved in a very serious car crash.’
‘A lorry’s brakes failed,’ explained Ed. ‘It crashed right through some traffic lights and hit my car.’
‘God,’ said Robin. ‘Were you—?’
‘He was in a coma for five days,’ said Sir Colin, ‘and had to learn to walk again. As you can imagine, all Sally’s and my attention was on Ed. Sally was virtually living at the hospital.
‘I blame myself for what happened next,’ said Sir Colin. Both his sons made to protest, but Sir Colin said, ‘No, let me say it. Will went off to university, and I wasn’t checking in with him as often as I would have done. I should’ve asked more questions, shouldn’t have taken things at face value. He mentioned people he was having drinks with, told me he’d joined a couple of societies, his coursework didn’t seem a problem – but then he disappeared. Simply packed up and vanished.
‘His tutor alerted us and we were extremely worried. I went up to the university myself and spoke to some of his friends, who explained that he’d been to a UHC talk held at the university, where he got talking to some members who gave him some literature to read, and asked him to attend a service, which he did. The next thing that happened was that he reappeared in his college, stripped his room and took off. Nobody has seen him since.
‘We tracked him down via the temple in Rupert Court and found out he was at Chapman Farm, in Norfolk. That’s where the UHC originated and it’s still their largest indoctrination centre. Members aren’t permitted mobile phones, so the only way to contact Will was to write to him, which we did. Eventually, under threat of the police, we managed to force the church to let us meet Will at their Central Temple in Rupert Court.
‘That meeting went extremely badly. It was like talking to a stranger. Will was totally unlike himself. He met everything we said with what I now know to be standard UHC talking points and jargon, and he refused point-blank to leave the church or resume his studies. I lost my temper, which was a big mistake, because it played right into the church’s hands and enabled them to paint me as his enemy. I should’ve done what Sally was doing: simply pour out love and show we weren’t trying to control or mislead him, which of course is what the church Principals were saying about us.
‘If I’d let Sally handle things, we might have had a chance of getting him out, but I was angry – angry he was throwing away his university career, and angry he’d caused so much fuss and worry when we still didn’t know whether Ed was going to be wheelchair-bound for the rest of his life.’
‘What year was this?’ Strike asked.
‘2012,’ said Sir Colin.
‘So he’s been in there nearly four years?’
‘Correct.’
‘And you’ve only seen him once since he joined?’
‘Once face to face, and otherwise only in photographs taken by Patterson Inc. Ed’s seen him, though.’
‘We didn’t talk,’ said Ed. ‘I tried to approach him last year in Wardour Street and he just turned tail and ran back into the Rupert Court Temple. I’ve walked the area a few times since and I’ve spotted him from a distance, out with his collecting tin. He looks ill. Emaciated. He’s the tallest of all of us and he must be several stone underweight.’
‘Apparently they’re chronically underfed at Chapman Farm,’ said Sir Colin. ‘They do a lot of fasts. I found out a lot about the inner workings of the church through a young ex-member called Kevin Pirbright. Kevin grew up in the church. He was there from the age of three.’
‘Yeah,’ said James, who for the last few minutes had given the impression of a man struggling to keep a guard on his tongue. ‘He had an excuse.’
There was a moment of charged silence.
‘Sorry,’ said James, though he didn’t look it, but then, evidently unable to hold the words back, he said forcefully,
‘Look, Will might have been too much of an idiot not to realise setting fire to a school chapel won’t solve world poverty, but come on. Come on. Of all the times to join a cult, he chooses the exact moment we’re waiting to find out whether Ed’s going to be paraplegic for the rest of his life?’
‘Will doesn’t think like that,’ said Ed.
‘No, because he’s a self-centred, monomaniacal little shit,’ said James hotly. ‘He knows perfectly well what he’s doing and he’s had plenty of opportunities to stop doing it. Don’t go thinking he’s some innocent halfwit,’ he threw at Strike and Robin. ‘Will can be bloody patronising to anyone who isn’t as clever as he is and you should hear him in an argument.’
‘James,’ said Ed quietly, but his brother ignored him.
‘My mother died on New Year’s Day. One of her last conscious acts was to write a letter to Will, begging him to let her see him one more time. Nothing. Nothing back. He let her die fretting about him, desperate to see him, and he didn’t turn up for the funeral, either. That was his choice and I’ll never forgive him for it. Never. There. I’ve said it,’ said James, slapping his hands to his thighs before getting to his feet. ‘I’m sorry, I can’t do this,’ he added, and before anyone else could speak, he’d marched out of the room.
‘I thought that was going to happen,’ muttered Ed.
‘I’m so sorry,’ said Sir Colin to Strike and Robin. His eyes had become wet.
‘Don’t worry about us,’ said Strike. ‘We’ve seen far worse.’
Sir Colin cleared his throat again and said, with a slight tremor in his voice,
‘Sally’s very last conscious act was to beg me to get Will out… do excuse me,’ he added, as tears began to leak from beneath the bifocals and he groped for a handkerchief.
Ed struggled up to move into the seat beside his father. As he moved around the table, Strike saw he still had a pronounced limp.
‘C’mon, Dad,’ he said, placing a hand on Sir Colin’s shoulder. ‘’S’all right.’
‘We don’t usually behave like this in public,’ Sir Colin told Strike and Robin, striving for a smile as he mopped his eyes. ‘It’s just that Sally… it’s all still very… very recent…’
With what Robin felt was deplorable timing, an attendant now arrived beside their table to offer lunch.
‘Yes, very good idea,’ said Sir Colin huskily. ‘Let’s eat.’
By the time menus had been provided and food ordered, Sir Colin had regained his composure. Once the waiter was out of earshot he said,
‘Of course, James is right, up to a point. Will’s got a formidable intellect and he’s a devil in a debate. I’m simply trying to explain that there’s always been a – a worrying naivety allied to Will’s very powerful brain. He’s thoroughly well intentioned, he truly wants to make the world a better place, but he also likes certainty and rules to cleave to. Before he found the prophets of the UHC, it was socialism, and before that he was a very tiresome Cub Scout – tiresome for the Cub leaders, because he didn’t like noisy games, but equally tiresome for us, with his endless good turns, and wanting to debate whether it was a good turn if it was something he’d been asked to do, or whether he had to think up his own acts of benevolence for them to qualify.
‘But Will’s real problem,’ said Sir Colin, ‘is that he doesn’t see evil. It’s theoretical to him, a faceless world force to be eradicated. He’s utterly blind to it when he’s up close.’
‘And you think the UHC’s evil?’
‘Oh yes, Mr Strike,’ said Sir Colin quietly. ‘Yes, I’m afraid I do.’
‘Have you tried visiting him? Arranging another meeting?’
‘Yes, but he’s refused. Only church members are allowed at Chapman Farm and when Ed and I tried to attend a service at the Rupert Court Temple to talk to Will, we were refused entry. It’s a registered religious building, so they have a legal right to bar visitors. We deduced from the fact we weren’t allowed in that the church have pictures of Will’s family members and have instructed church officials to keep us out.
‘As I told you on the phone, that’s how Patterson Inc messed things up. They sent the same man who’d been staking out Chapman Farm to the temple. Chapman Farm has cameras all around the perimeter, so the church authorities already knew what the man looked like, and when he arrived in Rupert Court they told him they knew who he was and who he worked for, and that Will was aware I was having private detectives follow him. At that point I terminated my contract with Patterson Inc. They’d not only failed to find out any information that would help me extract Will, they’d reinforced the church’s narrative against our family.’
‘Will’s still at Chapman Farm then, is he?’
‘As far as we know, yes. He sometimes goes out collecting money in Norwich and London. He occasionally stays overnight at the Rupert Court Temple, but otherwise he’s at the farm. Kevin told me recruits who don’t progress to running seminars and prayer meetings usually remain in the indoctrination centres – or spiritual retreats, as the church calls them. Apparently there’s a lot of hard labour at Chapman Farm.’
‘How did you meet this –’ Strike checked his notes ‘– Kevin Pirbright?’
‘I contacted him through his blog about the UHC,’ said Sir Colin.
‘Would he be amenable to talking to us?’
‘I’m sure he would have been,’ said Sir Colin quietly, ‘but he’s dead. He was shot in August of last year.’
‘Shot?’ repeated Strike and Robin simultaneously.
‘Yes. A single bullet to the head at home in his flat in Canning Town. It wasn’t suicide,’ said Sir Colin, forestalling Strike’s question. ‘There was no gun found at the scene. Patterson spoke to a police contact: they believe it was a drug-related killing. Apparently Kevin was dealing.’
‘Were you aware of that?’
‘No, but I wouldn’t have been… I think the poor chap wanted to impress me,’ said Sir Colin sadly. ‘Wanted to seem more well balanced than he really was. He didn’t have anyone else, because the rest of his family are still in the UHC. I never visited his flat and it was only towards the end that he admitted how much of a toll it was taking on him, writing about everything that had happened to him, trying to piece together his memories for his book about the UHC. I should’ve realised, I ought to have got him some kind of counselling. Should’ve remembered he was a damaged human being, instead of treating him as a kind of weapon to be used against the church.
‘I didn’t hear from him at all in the month before he was shot. Sally’s illness had been declared terminal, and I’d ticked Kevin off for behaving erratically and unhelpfully: I mean, in ways that were damaging to himself, quite apart from my wish to get Will out of the UHC. He made a scene at Giles Harmon’s book signing, swearing and shouting. I was constantly trying to impress upon him that those kinds of tactics could only backfire, but he was very angry, very bitter.’
‘Do you think it was a drug-related hit?’
Ed glanced sideways at his father, who hesitated before saying,
‘I was in rather an overwrought state when I heard he’d been shot and… if I’m honest, my thoughts certainly went straight to the UHC.’
‘But you’ve changed your mind?’
‘I have, yes. They don’t need guns; they’ve got expensive lawyers. They’re expert at shutting down criticism: articles by sympathetic journalists, celebrities doing PR… Kevin was very small fry, really, even if he’d managed to finish his book. They’d already forced him to take down every serious allegation he made on his blog, and they’d also made accusations of abuse against him.’
‘What kind of abuse?’
‘Sexual,’ said Sir Colin. ‘They claimed he’d abused his sisters. According to a letter Kevin received from the Council of Principals, both girls had made fairly detailed allegations against him. Now, I know as well as anyone that sexual abuse is endemic. One of the charities I work with helps survivors, so I’m only too familiar with the statistics and I’m not deluded: plenty of apparently charming people do terrible things behind closed doors. Obviously, I can’t discount the possibility that Kevin did abuse those girls, but one would have thought, if the church truly believed him guilty, they’d have informed the police, not written Kevin a threatening letter. On balance, I think it was just one more attempt to frighten him, and given what Kevin told me about the internal workings of the church, I think it likely his sisters were intimidated into signing those statements… I wanted to attend Kevin’s funeral,’ Sir Colin said sadly, ‘but it wasn’t possible. I made enquiries: his mother, who’s still inside the church, chose to bury him at Chapman Farm. I must admit, I found that very upsetting… Kevin had fought so hard to leave…’
Their food now arrived. Strike, who’d ordered seabass rather than the steak he really fancied, asked,
‘Can anything be done legally, with regards to Will?’
‘Believe me, I’ve tried,’ said Sir Colin, picking up his knife and fork. ‘Will’s got a trust fund, which was left to him by Sally’s father. He’s now taken out half the money in there and given it to the UHC. I wanted to have him assessed by a psychiatrist, but when the church got wind of that they arranged for him to see one of their own, who gave Will a completely clean bill of health. He’s of age and he’s been declared mentally competent. It’s a total impasse.
‘I’ve tried to interest political contacts in the church and the way it’s operating, but everyone seems afraid of taking it on, given the celebrity followers and its much-vaunted charitable work. There’s one MP I strongly suspect of being a member. He agitates for them in Parliament and becomes very aggressive towards anyone who criticises them. I’ve tried to interest some of my press contacts in an in-depth exposé, but they’re shy of being sued as well. Nobody wants to touch it.
‘Kevin was keen to take the UHC to court on the grounds of their abuse of him and his family. Sally and I were more than happy to fund the case, but my lawyers felt the chances of Kevin succeeding were very slim. It wasn’t just that he’d already been forced to admit to mistakes on his blog; he had some very odd beliefs.’
‘Such as?’
‘He was convinced the spirit world was real. As a matter of fact, he thought the UHC could conjure the dead. Patterson tried to find other people who might testify and drew a complete blank.’
‘Have you ever considered taking Will back by force? Grabbing him off Wardour Street?’
‘Sally and I discussed doing so, as a last resort,’ Sir Colin admitted, ‘but we were scared out of the idea when we found out what happened to a young man whose family did exactly that, back in 1993. His name was Alexander Graves. He came from a wealthy family, too. His father literally kidnapped him off the street when he was out collecting money. Graves was in a very poor mental state when they got him out, and a couple of days later hanged himself at the family home.
‘I’ve read extensively about mind control in the last few years,’ Sir Colin continued, his food growing cold as he talked. ‘I know far more than I did in the beginning about the techniques the UHC are using, and how effective they are. Kevin told me a lot of what goes on in there and it’s classic cult manipulation: restriction of information, control of thoughts and emotions and so on. I understand now why Will changed so rapidly. He’s literally not in his right mind.’
‘He can’t be,’ agreed Ed. ‘Not to come when Mum was dying, not to attend her funeral. James and his wife had twin boys last year, and he’s never even met them.’
‘So what exactly are you looking to achieve in hiring us?’ asked Strike.
Sir Colin set down his knife and fork to reach under his chair for an old black briefcase, from which he extracted a slim folder.
‘Before the UHC’s lawyers made Kevin bowdlerise his blog, I printed out copies. There are also two long emails from Kevin in here, which explain his family’s involvement in the church and some incidents he witnessed or was involved in. He mentions people and places, and makes at least one criminal allegation about Jonathan Wace, the UHC’s founder. If any of the other people Kevin mentions in these documents could be persuaded to talk, or even to testify, especially about coercion or mind control, I might be able to do something, legally. At a bare minimum, I’d like to persuade the UHC to let me see Will again.’
‘But ideally, you’d like to get him out?’
‘Of course,’ said Sir Colin, ‘but I accept that might not be realistic.
‘Patterson Inc’s report’s in here, too, for what it’s worth. They focused mainly on observing Will’s movements and the comings and goings at Rupert Court and Chapman Farm. Their idea was to get abusive or intimidating behaviour on camera, or an indication from Will that he was unhappy or being coerced. A couple of their people approached him in the street, undercover, and tried to engage him in conversation, but he insisted he was perfectly happy and tried to recruit them or persuade them to hand over cash… so: what do you think?’ said Sir Colin, looking from Strike to Robin and back again. ‘Is our case hopeless?’
Before Strike could answer, Robin had held out her hand for the documents Sir Colin had brought with him.
‘No,’ she said. ‘We’d be very happy to help.’
