---

author: ["Robert Galbraith"]
title: "Troubled Blood - index_split_050.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Robert Galbraith - Troubled Blood"
tags: ["said", "strike", "samhain", "deborah", "man", "one", "asked", "tudor", "door", "back", "uncle", "told", "like", "room", "gwilherm", "know", "old", "want", "yes", "looked", "ironmonger", "flat", "clare", "come", "mother"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI DUO]
url: /posts/robertgalbraith/TroubledBlood-indexsplit050html

---


Troubled Blood
38So long in secret cabin there he heldHer captive to his sensual desire;Till that with timely fruit her belly swell’d,And bore a boy unto that salvage sire…Edmund SpenserThe Faerie QueeneAsking himself whether he could possibly have got as lucky as he hoped, Strike threw a tip on the table and hurried outside into the driving rain, pulling on his coat as he went.If the mentally impaired adult in the sopping Sonic sweatshirt was indeed the big-eared child once marched around these streets by his eccentric parent, he’d have been living in this corner of Clerkenwell for forty years. Well, people did that, of course, Strike reflected, particularly if they had support there and if their whole world was a few familiar streets. The man was still within sight, heading stolidly toward Clerkenwell Road in the pelting rain, neither speeding up, nor making any attempt to prevent himself becoming progressively more sodden. Strike turned up his coat collar and followed.A short distance down St. John Street, Strike’s target turned right past a small ironmonger’s on the corner, and headed into Albemarle Way, the short street with an old red telephone box at the other end, and tall, unbroken buildings on either side. Strike’s interest quickened.Just past the ironmonger’s, the man set down both of his shopping bags on the wet pavement and took out a door key. Strike kept walking, because there was nowhere to hide, but made a note of the door number as he passed. Was it possible that the late Applethorpe had lived in this very flat? Hadn’t Strike thought that Albemarle Way presented a promising place to lie in wait for a victim? Not, perhaps, as good as Passing Alley, nor as convenient as the flats along Jerusalem Passage, but better by far than busy Clerkenwell Green, where Talbot had been convinced that Margot had struggled with a disguised Dennis Creed.Strike heard the front door close behind the large-eared man and doubled back. The dark blue door needed painting. A small push-button bell was beside it, beneath which was stuck the printed name “Athorn.” Could this be the name Irene had misremembered as Applethorpe, Appleton or Apton? Then Strike noticed that the man had left the key in the lock.With a feeling that he might have been far too dismissive of the mysterious ways of the universe, Strike pulled out the key and pressed the doorbell, which rang loudly inside. For a moment or two, nothing happened, then the door opened again and there stood the man in the wet Sonic sweatshirt.“You left this in the lock,” said Strike, holding out the key.The man addressed the third button of Strike’s overcoat rather than look him in eye.“I did that before and Clare said not to again,” he mumbled, holding out his hand for the key, which Strike gave him. The man began to close the door.“My name’s Cormoran Strike. I wonder whether I could come in and talk to you about your father?” Strike said, not quite putting his foot in the door, but preparing to do so should it be required.The other’s big-eared face stood out, pale, against the dark hall.“My-Dad-Gwilherm’s dead.”“Yes,” said Strike, “I know.”“He carried me on his shoulders.”“Did he?”“Yeah. Mum told me.”“D’you live alone?”“I live with Mum.”“Is her name Clare?”“No. Deborah.”“I’m a detective,” said Strike, pulling a card out of his pocket. “My name’s Cormoran Strike and I’d really like to talk to your mum, if that’s OK.”The man didn’t take the card, but looked at it out of the corner of his eye. Strike suspected that he couldn’t read.“Would that be all right?” Strike asked, as the cold rain continued to fall.“Yer, OK. You can come in,” said the other, still addressing Strike’s coat button, and he opened the door fully to admit the detective. Without waiting to see whether Strike was following, he headed up the dark staircase inside.Strike felt some qualms about capitalizing on the vulnerabilities of a man like Athorn, but the prospect of looking around what he now strongly suspected was the flat in which the self-proclaimed killer of Margot Bamborough had been living in 1974 was irresistible. After wiping his feet carefully on the doormat, Strike closed the door behind him, spotting as he did so a couple of letters lying on the floor, which the son of the house had simply walked over; one of them carried a wet footprint. Strike picked up the letters, then climbed the bare wooden stairs, over which hung a naked, non-functioning lightbulb.As he climbed, Strike indulged himself with the fantasy of a flat which nobody other than the inhabitants had entered for forty years, with locked cupboards and rooms, or even—it had been known to happen—a skeleton lying in open view. For a split-second, as he stepped out onto the landing, his hopes surged: the oven in the tiny kitchen straight ahead looked as though it dated from the seventies, as did the brown wall tiles, but unfortunately, from a detective point of view, the flat looked neat and smelled fresh and clean. There were even recent Hoover marks on the old carpet, which was patterned in orange and brown swirls. The Tesco bags sat waiting to be unpacked on lino that was scuffed, but that had been recently washed.To Strike’s right stood an open door onto a small sitting room. The man he’d followed was standing there, facing a much older woman, who was sitting crocheting in an armchair beside the window. She looked, as well she might, shocked to see a large stranger standing in her hall.“He wants to talk to you,” announced the man.“Only if you’re comfortable with that, Mrs. Athorn,” Strike called from the landing. He wished Robin was with him. She was particularly good at putting nervous women at their ease. He remembered that Janice had said that this woman was agoraphobic. “My name’s Cormoran Strike and I wanted to ask a few questions about your husband. But if you’re not happy, of course, I’ll leave immediately.”“I’m cold,” said the man loudly.“Change your clothes,” his mother advised him. “You’ve got wet. Why don’t you wear your coat?”“Too tight,” he said, “you silly woman.”He turned and walked out of the room past Strike, who stood back to let him pass. Gwilherm’s son disappeared into a room opposite, on the door of which the name “Samhain” appeared in painted wooden letters.Samhain’s mother didn’t appear to enjoy eye contact any more than her son did. At last, addressing Strike’s knees, she said,“All right. Come in, then.”“Thanks very much.”Two budgerigars, one blue, one green, chirruped in a cage in the corner of the sitting room. Samhain’s mother had been crocheting a patchwork blanket. A number of completed woolen squares were piled on the wide windowsill beside her and a basket of wools sat at her feet. A huge jigsaw mat was spread out on a large ottoman in front of the sofa. It bore a two-thirds completed puzzle of unicorns. As far as tidiness went, the sitting room compared very favorably with Gregory Talbot’s.“You’ve got some letters,” Strike said, and he held up the damp envelopes to show her.“You open them,” she said.“I don’t think—”“You open them,” she repeated.She had the same big ears as Samhain and the same slight underbite. These imperfections notwithstanding, there was a prettiness in her soft face and in her dark eyes. Her long, neatly plaited hair was white. She had to be at least sixty, but her smooth skin was that of a much younger woman. There was a strangely otherworldly air about her as she sat, plying her crochet hook beside the rainy window, shut away from the world. Strike wondered whether she could read. He felt safe to open the envelopes that were clearly junk mail, and did so.“You’ve been sent a seed catalog,” he said, showing her, “and a letter from a furniture shop.”“I don’t want them,” said the woman beside the window, still talking to Strike’s legs. “You can sit down,” she added.He sidled carefully between the sofa and the ottoman which, like Strike himself, was far too big for this small room. Having successfully avoided nudging the enormous jigsaw, he took a seat at a respectful distance from the crocheting woman.“This one,” said Strike, referring to the last letter, “is for Clare Spencer. Do you know her?”The letter didn’t have a stamp. Judging by the address on the back, the letter was from the ironmonger downstairs.“Clare’s our social worker,” she said. “You can open it.”“I don’t think I should do that,” said Strike. “I’ll leave it for Clare. You’re Deborah, is that right?”“Yes,” she murmured.Samhain reappeared in the door. He was now barefoot but wearing dry jeans and a fresh sweatshirt with Spider-Man on the front.“I’m going to put things in the fridge,” he announced, and disappeared again.“Samhain does the shopping now,” Deborah said, with a glance at Strike’s shoes. Though timid, she didn’t seem averse to talking to him.“Deborah, I’m here to ask you about Gwilherm,” Strike said.“He’s not here.”“No, I—”“He died.”“Yes,” said Strike. “I’m sorry. I’m really here because of a doctor who used to work—”“Dr. Brenner,” she said at once.“You remember Dr. Brenner?” said Strike, surprised.“I didn’t like him,” she said.“Well, I wanted to ask you about a different doc—”Samhain reappeared at the sitting room door and said loudly to his mother,“D’you want a hot chocolate, or not?”“Yes,” she said.“Do you want a hot chocolate, or not?” Samhain demanded of Strike.“Yes please,” Strike said, on the principle that all friendly gestures should be accepted in such situations.Samhain lumbered out of sight. Pausing in her crocheting, Deborah pointed at something straight ahead of her and said,“That’s Gwilherm, there.”Strike looked around. An Egyptian ankh, the symbol of eternal life, had been drawn on the wall behind the old TV. The walls were pale yellow everywhere except behind the ankh, where a patch of dirty green survived. In front of the ankh, on top of the flat-topped television set, was a black object which Strike at first glance took for a vase. Then he spotted the stylized dove on it, realized that it was an urn and understood, finally, what he was being told.“Ah,” said Strike. “Those are Gwilherm’s ashes, are they?”“I told Tudor to get the one with the bird, because I like birds.”One of the budgerigars fluttered suddenly across the cage in a blur of bright green and yellow.“Who painted that?” asked Strike, pointing at the ankh.“Gwilherm,” said Deborah, continuing to dextrously ply her crochet hook.Samhain re-entered the room, holding a tin tray.“Not on my jigsaw,” his mother warned him, but there was no other free surface.“Should I—?” offered Strike, gesturing toward the puzzle, but there was no space anywhere on the floor to accommodate it.“You close it,” Deborah told him, with a hint of reproach, and Strike saw that the jigsaw mat had wings, which could be fastened to protect the puzzle. He did so, and Samhain laid the tray on top. Deborah stuck her crochet hook carefully in the ball of wool and accepted a mug of instant hot chocolate and a Penguin biscuit from her son. Samhain kept the Batman mug for himself. Strike sipped his drink and said, “Very nice,” not entirely dishonestly.“I make good hot chocolate, don’t I, Deborah?” said Samhain, unwrapping a biscuit.“Yes,” said Deborah, blowing on the surface of the hot liquid.“I know this was a long time ago,” Strike began again, “but there was another doctor, who worked with Dr. Brenner—”“Old Joe Brenner was a dirty old man,” said Samhain Athorn, with a cackle.Strike looked at him in surprise. Samhain directed his smirk at the closed jigsaw.“Why was he a dirty old man?” asked the detective.“My Uncle Tudor told me,” said Samhain. “Dirty old man. Hahahaha. Is this mine?” he asked, picking up the envelope addressed to Clare Spencer.“No,” said his mother. “That’s Clare’s.”“Why is it?”“I think,” said Strike, “it’s from your downstairs neighbor.”“He’s a bastard,” said Samhain, putting the letter back down. “He made us throw everything away, didn’t he, Deborah?”“I like it better now,” said Deborah mildly. “It’s good now.”Strike allowed a moment or two to pass, in case Samhain had more to add, then asked,“Why did Uncle Tudor say Joseph Brenner was a dirty old man?”“Tudor knew everything about everyone,” said Deborah placidly.“Who was Tudor?” Strike asked her.“Gwilherm’s brother,” said Deborah. “He always knew about people round here.”“Does he still visit you?” asked Strike, suspecting the answer.“Passed-away-to-the-other side,” said Deborah, as though it was one long word. “He used to buy our shopping. He took Sammy to play football and to the swimming.”“I do all the shopping now,” piped up Samhain. “Sometimes I don’t want to do the shopping but if I don’t, I get hungry, and Deborah says, ‘It’s your fault there’s nothing to eat.’ So then I go shopping.”“Good move,” said Strike.The three of them drank their hot chocolate.“Dirty old man, Joe Brenner,” repeated Samhain, more loudly. “Uncle Tudor used to tell me some stories. Old Betty and the one who wouldn’t pay, hahahaha. Dirty old Joe Brenner.”“I didn’t like him,” said Deborah quietly. “He wanted me to take my pants off.”“Really?” said Strike.While this had surely been a question of a medical examination, he felt uncomfortable.“Yes, to look at me,” said Deborah. “I didn’t want it. Gwilherm wanted it, but I don’t like men I don’t know looking at me.”“No, well, I can understand that,” said Strike. “You were ill, were you?”“Gwilherm said I had to,” was her only response.If he’d still been in the Special Investigation Branch, there would have been a female officer with him for this interview. Strike wondered what her IQ was.“Did you ever meet Dr. Bamborough?” he asked. “She was,” he hesitated, “a lady doctor.”“I’ve never seen a lady doctor,” said Deborah, with what sounded like regret.“D’you know whether Gwilherm ever met Dr. Bamborough?”“She died,” said Deborah.“Yes,” said Strike, surprised. “People think she died, but no one knows for s—”One of the budgerigars made the little bell hanging from the top of its cage tinkle. Both Deborah and Samhain looked around, smiling.“Which one was it?” Deborah asked Samhain.“Bluey,” he said. “Bluey’s cleverer’n Billy Bob.”Strike waited for them to lose interest in the budgerigars, which took a couple of minutes. When both Athorns’ attention had returned to their hot chocolates, he said,“Dr. Bamborough disappeared and I’m trying to find out what happened to her. I’ve been told that Gwilherm talked about Dr. Bamborough, after she went missing.”Deborah didn’t respond. It was hard to know whether she was listening, or deliberately ignoring him.“I heard,” said Strike—there was no point not saying it; this was the whole reason he was here, after all—“that Gwilherm told people he killed her.”Deborah glanced at Strike’s left ear, then back at her hot chocolate.“You’re like Tudor,” she said. “You know what’s what. He probably did,” she added placidly.“You mean,” said Strike carefully, “he told people about it?”She didn’t answer.“… or you think he killed the doctor?”“Was My-Dad-Gwilherm doing magic on her?” Samhain inquired of his mother. “My-Dad-Gwilherm didn’t kill that lady. My uncle Tudor told me what really happened.”“What did your uncle tell you?” asked Strike, turning from mother to son, but Samhain had just crammed his mouth full of chocolate biscuit, so Deborah continued the story.“He woke me up one time when I was asleep,” said Deborah, “and it was dark. He said, ‘I killed a lady by mistake.’ I said, ‘You’ve had a bad dream.’ He said, ‘No, no, I’ve killed her, but I didn’t mean it.’”“Woke you up to tell you, did he?”“Woke me up, all upset.”“But you think it was just a bad dream?”“Yes,” said Deborah, but then, after a moment or two, she said, “but maybe he did kill her, because he could do magic.”“I see,” said Strike untruthfully, turning back to Samhain.“What did your Uncle Tudor say happened to the lady doctor?”“I can’t tell you that,” said Samhain, suddenly grinning. “Uncle Tudor said not to tell. Never.” But he grinned with a Puckish delight at having a secret. “My-Dad-Gwilherm did that,” he went on, pointing at the ankh on the wall.“Yes,” said Strike, “your mum told me.”“I don’t like it,” said Deborah placidly, looking at the ankh. “I’d like it if the walls were all the same.”“I like it,” said Samhain, “because it’s different from the other walls… you silly woman,” he added abstractedly.“Did Uncle Tudor—” began Strike, but Samhain, who’d finished his biscuit, now got to his feet and left the room, pausing in the doorway to say loudly,“Clare says it’s nice I still got things of Gwilherm’s!”He disappeared into his bedroom and closed the door firmly behind him. With the feeling he’d just seen a gold sovereign bounce down a grate, Strike turned back to Deborah.“Do you know what Tudor said happened to the doctor?”She shook her head, uninterested. Strike looked hopefully back toward Samhain’s bedroom door. It remained closed.“Can you remember how Gwilherm thought he’d killed the doctor?” he asked Deborah.“He said his magic killed her, then took her away.”“Took her away, did it?”Samhain’s bedroom door suddenly opened again and he trudged back into the room, holding a coverless book in his hand.“Deborah, is this My-Dad-Gwilherm’s magic book, is it?”“That’s it,” said Deborah.She’d finished her hot chocolate, now. Setting down the empty mug, she picked up her crochet again.Samhain held the book wordlessly out to Strike. Though the cover had come off, the title page was intact: The Magus by Francis Barrett. Strike had the impression that being shown this book was a mark of esteem, and he therefore flicked through it with an expression of deep interest, his main objective to keep Samhain happy and close at hand for further questioning.A few pages inside was a brown smear. Strike halted the cascade of pages to examine it more closely. It was, he suspected, dried blood, and had been wiped across a few lines of writing.This I will say more, to wit, that those who walk in their sleep, do, by no other guide than the spirit of the blood, that is, of the outward man, walk up and down, perform business, climb walls and manage things that are otherwise impossible to those that are awake.“You can do magic, with that book,” said Samhain. “But it’s my book, because it was My-Dad-Gwilherm’s, so it’s mine now,” and he held out his hand before Strike could examine it any further, suddenly jealous of his possession. When Strike handed it back, Samhain clutched the book to his chest with one hand and bent to take a third chocolate biscuit.“No more, Sammy,” said Deborah.“I went in the rain and got them,” said Samhain loudly. “I can have what I want. Silly woman. Stupid woman.”He kicked the ottoman, but it hurt his bare foot, and this increased his sudden, childish anger. Pink-faced and truculent, he looked around the room: Strike suspected he was looking for something to disarrange, or perhaps break. His choice landed on the budgies.“I’ll open the cage,” he threatened his mother, pointing at it. He let The Magus fall onto the sofa as he clambered onto the seat, looming over Strike.“No, don’t,” said Deborah, immediately distressed. “Don’t do that, Sammy!”“And I’ll open the window,” said Samhain, now trying to walk his way along the sofa seats, but blocked by Strike. “Hahaha. You stupid woman.”“No—Samhain, don’t!” said Deborah, frightened.“You don’t want to open the cage,” said Strike, standing up and moving in front of it. “You wouldn’t want your budgies to fly away. They won’t come back.”“I know they won’t,” said Samhain. “The last ones didn’t.”His anger seemed to subside as fast as it had come, in the face of rational opposition. Still standing on the sofa, he said grumpily, “I went out in the rain. I got them.”“Have you got Clare’s phone number?” Strike asked Deborah.“In the kitchen,” she said, without asking why he wanted it.“Can you show me where that is?” Strike asked Samhain, although he knew perfectly well. The whole flat was as big as Irene Hickson’s sitting room. Samhain frowned at Strike’s midriff for a few moments, then said,“All right, then.”He walked the length of the sofa, jumped off the end with a crash that made the bookcase shake, and then lunged for the biscuits.“Hahaha,” he taunted his mother, both hands full of Penguins. “I got them. Silly woman. Stupid woman.”He walked out of the room.As Strike inched back out of the space between ottoman and sofa, he stooped to pick up The Magus, which Samhain had dropped, and slid it under his coat. Crocheting peacefully by the window, Deborah Athorn noticed nothing.A short list of names and numbers was attached to the kitchen wall with a drawing pin. Strike was pleased to see that several people seemed interested in Deborah and Samhain’s welfare.“Who’re these people?” he asked, but Samhain shrugged and Strike was confirmed in his suspicion that Samhain couldn’t read, no matter how proud he was of The Magus. He took a photo of the list with his phone, then turned to Samhain.“It would really help me if you could remember what your Uncle Tudor said happened to the lady doctor.”“Hahaha,” said Samhain, who was unwrapping another Penguin. “I’m not telling.”“Your Uncle Tudor must have really trusted you, to tell you.”Samhain chewed in silence for a while, then swallowed and said, with a proud little upward jerk of the chin, “Yer.”“It’s good to have people you can trust with important information.”Samhain seemed pleased with this statement. He ate his biscuit and, for the first time, glanced at Strike’s face. The detective had the impression that Samhain was enjoying another man’s presence in the flat.“I did that,” he said suddenly and, walking to the sink, he picked up a small clay pot, which was holding a washing-up brush and a sponge. “I go to class on Tuesdays and we make stuff. Ranjit teaches us.”“That’s excellent,” said Strike, taking it from him and examining it. “Where were you, when your uncle told you what happened to Dr. Bamborough?”“At the football,” said Samhain. “And I made this,” he told Strike, prising a wooden photo frame off the fridge, where it had been attached with a magnet. The framed picture was a recent one of Deborah and Samhain, both of whom had a budgerigar perched on their finger.“That’s very good,” said Strike, admiring it.“Yer,” said Samhain, taking it back from him and slapping it on the fridge. “Ranjit said it was the best one. We were at the football and I heard Uncle Tudor telling his friend.”“Ah,” said Strike.“And then he said to me, ‘Don’t you tell no one.’”“Right,” said Strike. “But if you tell me, I can maybe help the doctor’s family. They’re really sad. They miss her.”Samhain cast another fleeting look at Strike’s face.“She can’t come back now. People can’t be alive again when they’re dead.”“No,” said Strike. “But it’s nice when their families know what happened and where they went.”“My-Dad-Gwilherm died under the bridge.”“Yes.”“My Uncle Tudor died in the hospital.”“You see?” said Strike. “It’s good you know, isn’t it?”“Yer,” said Samhain. “I know what happened.”“Exactly.”“Uncle Tudor told me it was Nico and his boys done it.”It came out almost indifferently.“You can tell her family,” said Samhain, “but nobody else.”“Right,” said Strike, whose mind was working very fast. “Did Tudor know how Nico and the boys did it?”“No. He just knew they did.”Samhain picked up another biscuit. He appeared to have no more to say.“Er—can I use your bathroom?”“The bog?” said Samhain, with his mouth full of chocolate.“Yes. The bog,” said Strike.Like the rest of the flat, the bathroom was old but perfectly clean. It was papered in green, with a pattern of pink flamingos on it, which doubtless dated from the seventies and now, forty years later, was fashionably kitsch. Strike opened the bathroom cabinet, found a pack of razor blades, extracted one and cut the blood-stained page of The Magus out with one smooth stroke, then folded it and slipped it in his pocket.Out on the landing, he handed Samhain the book back.“You left it on the floor.”“Oh,” said Samhain. “Ta.”“You won’t do anything to the budgies if I leave, will you?”Samhain looked up at the ceiling, grinning slightly.“Will you?” asked Strike.“No,” sighed Samhain at last.Strike returned to the doorway of the sitting room.“I’ll be off now, Mrs. Athorn,” he said. “Thanks very much for talking to me.”“Goodbye,” said Deborah, without looking at him.Strike headed downstairs, and let himself back onto the street. Once outside, he stood for a moment in the rain, thinking hard. So unusually still was he, that a passing woman turned to stare back at him.Reaching a decision, Strike turned left, and entered the ironmonger’s which lay directly below the Athorns’ flat.A sullen, grizzled and aproned man behind the counter looked up at Strike’s entrance. One of his eyes was larger than the other, which gave him an oddly malevolent appearance.“Morning,” said Strike briskly. “I’ve just come from the Athorns, upstairs. I gather you want to talk to Clare Spencer?”“Who’re you?” asked the ironmonger, with a mixture of surprise and aggression.“Friend of the family,” said Strike. “Can I ask why you’re putting letters to their social worker through their front door?”“Because they don’t pick up their phones at the bloody social work department,” snarled the ironmonger. “And there’s no point talking to them, is there?” he added, pointing his finger at the ceiling.“Is there a problem I can help with?”“I doubt it,” said the ironmonger shortly. “You’re probably feeling pretty bloody pleased with the situation, are you, if you’re a friend of the family? Nobody has to put their hand in their pocket except me, eh? Quick bit of a cover-up and let someone else foot the bill, eh?”“What cover-up would this be?” asked Strike.The ironmonger was only too willing to explain. The flat upstairs, he told Strike, had long been a health risk, crammed with the hoarded belongings of many years and a magnet for vermin, and in a just world, it ought not to be he who was bearing the costs of living beneath a pair of actual morons—“You’re talking about friends of mine,” said Strike.“You do it, then,” snarled the ironmonger. “You pay a bleeding fortune to keep the rats down. My ceiling’s sagging under the weight of their filth—”“I’ve just been upstairs and it’s perfectly—”“Because they mucked it out last month, when I said I was going to bloody court!” snarled the ironmonger. “Cousins come down from Leeds when I threaten legal action—nobody give a shit until then—and I come back Monday morning and they’ve cleaned it all up. Sneaky bastards!”“Didn’t you want the flat cleaned?”“I want compensation for the money I’ve had to spend! Structural damage, bills to Rentokil—that pair shouldn’t be living together without supervision, they’re not fit, they should be in a home! If I have to take it to court, I will!”“Bit of friendly advice,” said Strike, smiling. “If you behave in any way that could be considered threatening toward the Athorns, their friends will make sure it’s you who ends up in court. Have a nice day,” he added, heading for the door.The fact that the Athorns’ flat had recently been mucked out by helpful relatives tended to suggest that Margot Bamborough’s remains weren’t hidden on the premises. On the other hand, Strike had gained a bloodstain and a rumor, which was considerably more than he’d had an hour ago. While still disinclined to credit supernatural intervention, he had to admit that deciding to eat breakfast on St. John Street that morning had been, at the very least, a most fortuitous choice.
