---

author: ["Robert Galbraith"]
title: "Troubled Blood - index_split_078.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Robert Galbraith - Troubled Blood"
tags: ["said", "robin", "strike", "pat", "back", "morning", "could", "might", "face", "like", "told", "morris", "took", "cigarette", "know", "way", "given", "day", "office", "looked", "tell", "going", "well", "thought", "gloria"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI DUO]
url: /posts/robertgalbraith/TroubledBlood-indexsplit078html

---


Troubled Blood
60Fortune, the foe of famous cheuisaunceSeldome (said Guyon) yields to vertue aide,But in her way throwes mischiefe and mischaunce,Whereby her course is stopt, and passage staid.Edmund SpenserThe Faerie QueeneWhat would have happened had Sam Barclay not opened the door that evening and switched on the light was a question that preoccupied both detective partners over the weekend, each of them re-running the conversation in their head, wondering what the other was thinking, and whether too much had been said, or given away.Sober now, Strike had to be glad he hadn’t done what whisky had been urging him to do. Had he acted on that alcohol-fueled impulse, he might now be in a state of bitter remorse, with no way back to the friendship that was unique in his life. Yet in his free moments, he wondered whether Robin had known how dangerously close he’d come to pushing the conversation into territory that had previously been fenced around with barbed wire, or that, seconds before Barclay flicked the light switch, Strike had been trying to remember when he’d last changed his sheets.Robin, meanwhile, had woken on Sunday morning with her face aching as though it had been trodden on, a slight hangover, and a volatile mixture of pleasure and anxiety. She went back over everything she’d said to Strike, hoping she hadn’t betrayed any of those feelings she habitually denied, even to herself. The memory of him telling her she was his best friend caused a little spurt of happiness every time she returned to it, but as the day wore on, and her bruising worsened, she wished she’d been brave enough to ask him directly how he now felt about Charlotte Campbell.An image of Charlotte hung permanently in Robin’s head these days, like a shadowy portrait she’d never wanted hung. The picture had acquired shape and form in the four years since they’d passed on the stairs in the Denmark Street office, because of the many details Ilsa had given her, and the snippets she’d read in the press. Last night, though, that image had become stark and fixed: a darkly romantic vision of a lost and dying love, breathing her final words in Strike’s ear as she lay among trees.And this was, however you looked at it, an extraordinarily powerful image. Strike had once, when extremely drunk, told Robin that Charlotte was the most beautiful woman he’d ever seen, and as she hovered between life and death, that beautiful woman had chosen to contact Strike, to tell him she loved him still. What did prosaic Robin Ellacott have to offer that was in any way equal to such high-stakes drama, such extremity of emotion? An up-to-date rota, nearly docketed invoices and cups of strong tea? Doubtless because of the pain in her face, Robin’s mood vacillated between diminishing cheerfulness and a tendency to brood. Finally, she gave herself a stern talking to: Strike had given her an unprecedented assurance of affection, and she’d never have to see Saul Morris again, and she should be delighted about both.Predictably, it was Pat who took the sudden firing of Saul Morris hardest. Strike delivered the news on Monday morning, as he and the secretary narrowly missed colliding in the doorway onto Denmark Street, Strike on his way out, Pat on her way in. Both of them were preparing for the ingestion of nicotine, Pat having just taken out the electronic cigarette she used during work hours, Strike already holding the Benson & Hedges he rarely smoked in the office.“Morning,” said Strike. “I’ve left a note on your desk, couple of things I’d like you to do while I’m out. Robin’ll be in at ten. Oh—”He’d taken a couple of steps before turning back.“—and can you calculate Morris’s pay up to Friday and transfer it into his account right away? He’s not coming back.”He didn’t wait for a reaction, so it was Robin who took the brunt of their secretary’s disappointment when she arrived at ten to ten. Pat had Radio Two playing, but turned it off the moment the door handle turned.“Morning. Why—what ’appened to you?” said Pat.Robin’s face looked worse, two days on, than it had on Saturday. While the swelling had subsided, both eyes were ringed in dark gray tinged with red.“It was an accident. I bumped into something,” said Robin, stripping off her coat and hanging it on a peg. “So I won’t be on surveillance this week.”She took a book out of her handbag and crossed to the kettle, holding it. She hadn’t particularly enjoyed the covert staring on the Tube that morning, but wasn’t going to mention Strike’s elbow to Pat, because she tried, wherever possible, not to fuel Pat’s antipathy for her partner.“Why won’t Saul be coming back?” Pat demanded.“He didn’t work out,” said Robin, her back to Pat as she took down two mugs.“What d’you mean?” said Pat indignantly. “He caught that man who was having it away with the nanny. He always kept his paperwork up to date, which is more’n you can say for that Scottish nutter.”“I know,” said Robin. “But he wasn’t a great team player, Pat.”Pat took a deep drag of nicotine vapor, frowning.“He,” she nodded toward the empty chair where Strike usually sat, “could take a few lessons from Morris!”Robin knew perfectly well that it wasn’t Pat’s decision who the partners hired and fired, but unlike Strike, she also thought that in such a small team, Pat deserved the truth.“It wasn’t Cormoran who wanted him gone,” she said, turning to face the secretary, “it was me.”“You!” said Pat, astounded. “I thought the pair of you were keen on each other!”“No. I didn’t like him. Apart from anything else, he sent me a picture of his erect penis at Christmas.”Pat’s deeply lined face registered an almost comical dismay.“In… in the post?”Robin laughed.“What, tucked inside a Christmas card? No. By text.”“You didn’t—?”“Ask for it? No,” said Robin, no longer smiling. “He’s a creep, Pat.”She turned back to the kettle. The untouched bottle of vodka was still standing beside the sink. As Robin’s eyes fell on it, she remembered the idea that had occurred to her on Saturday night, shortly before Morris’s hands closed around her waist. After giving the secretary her coffee, she carried her own into the inner office, along with the book she’d taken from her bag. Pat called after her,“Shall I update the rota, or will you?”“I’ll do it,” said Robin, closing the door, but instead, she called Strike.“Morning,” he said, answering on the second ring.“Hi. I forgot to tell you an idea I had on Saturday night.”“Go on.”“It’s about Gloria Conti. Why did she vomit in the bathroom at Margot’s barbecue, if Oakden didn’t spike the punch?”“Because he’s a liar, and he did spike the punch?” suggested Strike. He was currently in the same Islington square that Robin had patrolled on Friday, but he paused now and reached for his cigarettes, eyes on the central garden, which today was deserted. Beds densely planted with purple pansies looked like velvet cloaks spread upon the glistening grass.“Or did she throw up because she was pregnant?” said Robin.“I thought,” said Strike, after a pause while lighting a cigarette, “that only happens in the mornings? Isn’t that why it’s called—”On the point of saying “morning sickness,” Strike remembered the expectant wife of an old army friend, who’d been hospitalized for persistent, round-the-clock vomiting.“My cousin threw up any time of the day when she was pregnant,” said Robin. “She couldn’t stand certain food smells. And Gloria was at a barbecue.”“Right,” said Strike, who was suddenly remembering the odd notion that had occurred to him after talking to the Bayliss sisters. Robin’s theory struck him as stronger than his. In fact, his idea was weakened if Robin’s was true.“So,” he said, “you’re thinking it might’ve been Gloria who—”“—had the abortion at the Bride Street clinic? Yes,” said Robin. “And that Margot helped her arrange it. Irene mentioned Gloria being closeted in Margot’s consulting room, remember? While Irene was left on reception?”The lilac bush in the central garden was casting out such a heavy scent that Strike could smell it even over the smoke of his cigarette.“I think you could be on to something here,” said Strike slowly.“I also thought this might explain—”“Why Gloria doesn’t want to talk to us?”“Well, yes. Apart from it being a traumatic memory, her husband might not know what happened,” said Robin. “Where are you just now?”“Islington,” said Strike. “I’m about to have a crack at Mucky Ricci.”“What?” said Robin, startled.“Been thinking about it over the weekend,” said Strike, who, unlike Robin, had had no time off, but had run surveillance on Shifty and Miss Jones’s boyfriend. “We’re nearly ten months into our year, and we’ve got virtually nothing. If he’s demented, obviously it’ll be no-go, but you never know, I could be able to get something out of him. He might even,” said Strike, “get a kick out of reliving the good old days…”“And what if his sons find out?”“He can’t talk, or not properly. I’m banking on him being unable to tell them I’ve been in. Look,” said Strike, in no particular hurry to hang up, because he wanted to finish his cigarette, and would rather do it talking to Robin, “Betty Fuller thinks Ricci killed her, I could tell. So did Tudor Athorn; he told his nephew so, and they were the kind of people who were plugged into local gossip and knew about local low life.“I keep going back to the thing Shanker said, when I told him about Margot vanishing without a trace. ‘Professional job.’ When you take a step back and look at it,” said Strike, now down to the last centimeter of his cigarette, “it seems borderline impossible for every trace of her to have disappeared, unless someone with plenty of practice handled it.”“Creed had practice,” said Robin quietly.“D’you know what I did last night?” said Strike, ignoring this interjection. “Looked up Kara Wolfson’s birth certificate online.”“Why? Oh,” said Robin, and Strike could hear her smiling, “star sign?”“Yeah. I know it breaks the means before motive rule,” he added, before Robin could point it out, “but it struck me that someone might’ve told Margot about Kara’s murder. Doctors know things, don’t they? In and out of people’s houses, having confidential consultations. They’re like priests. They hear secrets.”“You were checking whether Kara was a Scorpio,” said Robin. It was a statement rather than a question.“Exactly. And wondering whether Ricci looked into that party to show his goons which woman they were going to pick off.”“Well?”“Well what?”“Was Kara a Scorpio?”“Oh. No. Taurus—seventeenth of May.”Strike now heard pages turning at Robin’s end of the call.“Which means, according to Schmidt…” said Robin, and there was a brief pause, “… she was Cetus.”“Huh,” said Strike, who’d now finished his cigarette. “Well, wish me luck. I’m going in.”“Good l—”“Cormoran Strike!” said somebody gleefully, behind him.As Strike hung up on Robin, a slender black woman in a cream coat came alongside him, beaming.“You don’t remember me, do you?” she said. “Selly Oak. I’m—”“Marjorie!” said Strike, the memory coming back to him. “Marjorie the physiotherapist. How are you? What’re you—?”“I do a few hours in the old folks’ home up the road!” said Marjorie. “And look at you, all famous…”Fuck.It took Strike twenty-five minutes to extricate himself from her.“… so that’s bloody that,” he told Robin later at the office. “I pretended I was in the area to visit my accountant, but if she’s working at St. Peter’s, there’s no chance of us getting in to see Ricci.”“No chance of you getting in there—”“I’ve already told you,” said Strike sharply. The state of Robin’s face was a visible warning against recklessness, of the perils of failing to think through consequences. “You’re not going anywhere near him.”“I’ve got Miss Jones on the line,” Pat called from the outer office.“Put her through to me,” said Robin, as Strike mouthed “thanks.”Robin talked to Miss Jones while continuing to readjust the rota on her computer, which, given Robin’s own temporary unavailability for surveillance, and Morris’s permanent absence, was like trying to balance a particularly tricky linear equation. She spent the next forty minutes making vague sounds of agreement whenever Miss Jones paused to draw breath. Their client’s objective, Robin could tell, was staying on the line long enough for Strike to come back to the office. Finally, Robin got rid of her by pretending to get a message from Pat saying Strike would be out all day.It was her only lie of the day, Robin thought, while Strike and Pat discussed Barclay’s expenses in the outer office. Given that Strike was adept himself at avoiding pledging his own word when he didn’t want to, he really ought to have noticed that Robin had made no promises whatsoever about staying away from Mucky Ricci.
