---

author: ["Robert Galbraith"]
title: "Troubled Blood - index_split_069.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Robert Galbraith - Troubled Blood"
tags: ["said", "robin", "strike", "think", "know", "asked", "sign", "looking", "might", "back", "morris", "well", "mother", "dorothy", "going", "could", "something", "talbot", "go", "mind", "eye", "want", "made", "supposed", "fortune"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI DUO]
url: /posts/robertgalbraith/TroubledBlood-indexsplit069html

---


Troubled Blood
“What’s that?” asked Strike.“It’s a point in the horoscope that’s supposed to be about worldly success. ‘Part of Fortune in Second, MONEY AND POSSESSIONS.’ And ‘Mother’s House,’ underlined. The Oakdens lived on Fortune Street, remember? And the Part of Fortune was in the house of money and possessions when Margot disappeared, and he’s connecting that with the fact that Dorothy inherited her mother’s house, and saying that wasn’t a tragedy, but a stroke of luck for Dorothy.”“You think?” said Strike, rubbing his tired eyes.“Yes, because look, he then starts rambling about Virgo—which is Dorothy’s sign under both systems—being petty and having an ax to grind, which from what we know about her fits. Anyway,” said Robin, “I’ve been looking at dates of birth, and guess what? Under both the traditional and Schmidt’s systems, Dorothy’s mother was a Scorpio.”“Christ’s sake, how many more Scorpios are we going to find?”“I know what you mean,” said Robin, unfazed, “but from what I’ve read, Scorpio’s one of the most common birth signs. Anyway, this is the important bit: Carl Oakden was born on the sixth of April. That means he’s Aries under the traditional system, but Pisces under Schmidt’s.”A short silence followed.“How old was Oakden when his grandmother fell downstairs?” asked Strike.“Fourteen,” said Robin.Strike turned his face away from Robin to blow smoke out of the window again.“You think he pushed his grandmother, do you?”“It might not have been deliberate,” said Robin. “He could’ve pushed past her and she lost her balance.”“‘Margot confronted Pisces.’ It’d be a hell of a thing to accuse a child of—”“Maybe she never confronted him at all. The confrontation might have been something Talbot suspected, or imagined. Either way—”“—it’s suggestive, yeah. It is suggestive…” Strike let out a slight groan. “We’re going to have to interview bloody Oakden, aren’t we? There’s a bit of a hotspot developing around that little grouping, isn’t there? Brenner and the Oakdens, outward respectability—”“—inward poison. Remember? That’s what Oonagh Kennedy said about Dorothy.”The detectives sat for a moment or two, watching Elinor Dean’s front door, which remained closed, her dark garden silent and still.“How many murders,” Robin asked, “d’you think go undetected?”“Clue’s in the question, isn’t it? ‘Undetected’—impossible to know. But yeah, it’s those quiet, domestic deaths you wonder about. Vulnerable people picked off by their own families, and everyone thinking it was ill health—”“—or a mercy that they’ve gone,” said Robin.“Some deaths are a mercy,” said Strike.And with these words, in both of their mind’s eyes rose an image of horror. Strike was remembering the corpse of Sergeant Gary Topley, lying on the dusty road in Afghanistan, eyes wide open, his body missing from the waist down. The vision had recurred in Strike’s nightmares ever since he’d seen it, and occasionally, in these dreams, Gary talked to him, lying in the dust. It was always a comfort to remember, on waking, that Gary’s consciousness had been snuffed out instantly, that his wide-open eyes and puzzled expression showed that death had claimed him before his brain could register agony or terror.But in Robin’s mind there was a picture of something she wasn’t sure had ever happened. She was imagining Margot Bamborough chained to a radiator (I whip her face and breasts), pleading for her life (the strategy is laughably transparent), and suffering torments (it could be raised to an ecstasy of pain, and then it knew it lived, and stood tremulously on the edge of the abyss, begging, screaming, begging for mercy).“You know,” said Robin, talking partly to break the silence and dispel that mental image, “I’d quite like to find a picture of Dorothy’s mother, Maud.”“Why?”“For confirmation, because—I don’t think I told you, look…”She flicked backward in the notebook to the page littered with water signs. In small writing beneath a picture of a scorpion were the words “MOLE (Adams).”“Is that a new sign?” asked Strike. “The Mole?”“No,” said Robin, smiling, “Talbot’s alluding to the fact that the astrologer Evangeline Adams said the true Scorpio often has a birthmark, or a prominent mole. I’ve read her book, got it second hand.”There was a pause.“What?” said Strike, because Robin was looking at him expectantly.“I was waiting for you to jeer.”“I lost the will to jeer some way back,” said Strike. “You realize we’re supposed to have solved this case in approximately fourteen weeks’ time?”“I know,” sighed Robin. She picked up her mobile to check the time, and out of the corner of his eye, Strike saw yet another text from Morris. “Well, we’re meeting the Bayliss sisters later. Maybe they’ll have something useful to tell us… are you sure you want to interview them with me? I’d be fine to do it alone. You’re going to be really tired after sitting here all night.”“I’ll sleep on the train to Truro afterward,” said Strike. “You got any plans for Easter Sunday?”“No,” said Robin. “Mum wanted me to go home but…”Strike wondered what the silent sequel to the sentence was, and whether she’d made plans with someone else, and didn’t want to tell him about it. Morris, for instance.“OK, I swear this is the last thing I’m going to bring up from Talbot’s notebook,” Robin said, “but I want to flag something up before we meet the Baylisses.”“Go on.”“You said yourself, he seemed racist, from his notes.”“‘Black phantom,’” Strike quoted, “yeah.”“And ‘Black Moon Lilith—’”“—and wondering whether she was a witch.”“Exactly. I think he really harassed her, and probably the family, too,” Robin said. “The language he uses for Wilma—‘crude,’ ‘dishonest’…” Robin flicked back to the page featuring the three horned signs, “and ‘woman as she is now in this eon… armed and militant.’”“A radical feminist witch.”“Which sounds quite cool when you say it,” said Robin, “but I don’t think Talbot meant it that way.”“You think this is why the daughters didn’t want to talk to us?”“Maybe,” said Robin. “So I think we need to be… you know. Sensitive to what might have gone on. Definitely not go in there looking as though we suspect Wilma of anything.”“Point well made, and taken,” said Strike.“Right then,” said Robin with a sigh, as she put the notebook back into her messenger bag. “I’d better get going… What is he doing in there?” Robin asked quietly, looking at Elinor Dean’s front door.“Barclay thinks it might be a rubber fetish.”“He’d need a lot of talcum powder to wriggle himself into anything made of rubber, the size of that belly.”Strike laughed.“Well, I’ll see you in…” Robin checked the time on her mobile, “seven hours, forty-five minutes.”“Sleep well,” said Strike.As she walked away from the BMW, Strike saw her looking at her mobile again, doubtless reading Morris’s texts. He watched as she got into the ancient Land Rover, then turned the tank-like vehicle in a three-point turn, raising a hand in farewell as she passed him, heading back to Earl’s Court.As Strike reached for the Thermos of tea under his seat, he remembered the supposed dental appointment of the other day, about which Robin had sounded strangely flustered, and which had taken place (though Strike hadn’t previously made the connection) on Morris’s afternoon off. A most unwelcome possibility crossed his mind: had Robin lied, like Irene Hickson, and for the same reason? His mind darted to what Robin had said a few months previously, when she’d mentioned her ex-husband having a new partner: “Oh, I didn’t tell you, did I? I told Morris.”As he unscrewed his Thermos, Strike mentally reviewed Robin’s behavior around Morris in the last few months. She’d never seemed to particularly like him, but might that have been an act, designed to deflect attention? Were his partner and his subcontractor actually in a relationship which he, busy with his own troubles, had failed to spot?Strike poured himself tea, settled back in his seat, and glowered at Elinor Dean’s closed door through the steam rising from plastic-tasting tea the color of mud. He was angry, he told himself, because he should have established a work rule that partners weren’t allowed to date subcontractors, and for another reason which he preferred not to examine, because he knew perfectly well what it was, and no good could come of brooding upon it.
