---

author: ["Robert Galbraith"]
title: "Troubled Blood - index_split_043.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Robert Galbraith - Troubled Blood"
tags: ["said", "strike", "joan", "ted", "know", "say", "day", "never", "asked", "polworth", "year", "thing", "like", "back", "way", "lucy", "kerenza", "yeah", "house", "could", "morning", "look", "love", "little", "want"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI DUO]
url: /posts/robertgalbraith/TroubledBlood-indexsplit043html

---


Troubled Blood
31Deare knight, as deare, as euer knight was deare,That all these sorrowes suffer for my sake,High heuen behold the tedious toyle, ye for me take…Edmund SpenserThe Faerie QueeneStrike’s gastric upset added days to his illness, and he spent New Year’s Eve in bed, reliant on takeaway pizzas but hardly able to touch them when they arrived. For the first time in his life he didn’t fancy chocolate, because the truffles he’d consumed after his out-of-date chicken had been the first things to reappear during his prolonged vomiting. The only enjoyable thing he did was to watch the DVD of Tom Waits’s No Visitors After Midnight, the taped concerts Robin had bought him for Christmas, which he finally unwrapped on New Year’s Day. His text thanking her elicited a short “you’re welcome.”By the time he felt fit enough to travel down to Cornwall, clutching his belated Christmas gifts, Strike had lost over a stone, and this was the first thing an anxious Joan commented on when he finally appeared at her house in St. Mawes, full of apologies for his absence at Christmas.If he’d waited one more day to come down to Joan and Ted’s, he’d have been unable to reach them, because no sooner had he arrived than a vicious weather front crashed over the south of Britain. Storms lashed the Cornish coast, train services were suspended, tons of sand washed off the beaches and flooding turned the roads of coastal towns into freezing canals. The Cornish peninsula was temporarily cut off from the rest of England, and while St. Mawes had not fared as badly as Mevagissey and Fowey along the coast, sandbags had appeared at the entrances of buildings on the seafront. Waves smashed against the harbor wall, khaki and gunmetal gray. The tourists had melted out of sight like the seals: locals in sodden oilskins greeted each other with nods as they made their way in and out of local shops. All the gaudy prettiness of summertime St. Mawes was wiped away and, like an actress when the stage-paint is removed, the town’s true self was revealed, a place of hard stone and stiff backbone.Though pelted with rain and pummeled by gales, Ted and Joan’s house was, mercifully, set on high ground. Trapped there, Strike remembered Lucy telling him he was better suited to a crisis than to keeping a commitment going, and knew that there was truth in the accusation. He was well suited to emergencies, to holding his nerve, to quick thinking and fast reactions, but found the qualities demanded by Joan’s slow decline harder to summon.Strike missed the absence of an overriding objective, in pursuit of which he could shelve his sadness; missed the imperative to dismiss pain and distress in the service of something greater, which had sustained him in the military. None of his old coping strategies were admissible in Joan’s kitchen, beside the flowered casserole dishes and her old oven gloves. Dark humor and stoicism would be considered unfeeling by the kindly neighbors who wanted him to share and show his pain. Craving diversionary action, Strike was instead expected to provide small talk and homely acts of consideration.Joan was quietly delighted: hours and days alone with her nephew were compensation for the Christmas he’d missed. Resigned, Strike gave her what she wanted: as much companionship as possible, sitting with her and talking to her all day long. Chemotherapy had been discontinued, because Joan wasn’t strong enough for it: she wore a headscarf over the wispy hair she had left, and her husband and nephew watched anxiously as she picked at food, and held themselves constantly ready to assist her when she moved between rooms. Either of them could have carried her with ease, now.As the days went by, Strike noticed another change in his aunt that surprised him. Just as her storm-ravaged birthplace had revealed a different aspect in adversity, so an unfamiliar Joan was emerging, a Joan who asked open-ended questions that were not designed to elicit confirmation of her own biases, or thinly veiled requests for comforting lies.“Why haven’t you ever married, Cormoran?” she asked her nephew at midday on Saturday morning, when they sat together in the sitting room, Joan in the comfiest armchair, Strike on the sofa. The lamp beside her, which they’d turned on because of the overcast, rainy day, made her skin look as finely translucent as tissue paper.Strike was so conditioned to tell Joan what she wanted to hear that he was at a loss for an answer. The honest response he’d given Dave Polworth seemed impossible here. She’d probably take it as her fault if he told her that he wasn’t the marrying kind; she must have done something wrong, failed to teach him that love was essential to happiness.“Dunno,” he said, falling back on cliché. “Maybe I haven’t met the right woman.”“If you’re waiting for perfection,” said the new Joan, “it doesn’t exist.”“You don’t wish I’d married Charlotte, do you?” he asked her. He knew perfectly well that both Joan and Lucy considered Charlotte little short of a she-devil.“I most certainly don’t,” said Joan, with a spark of her old fight, and they smiled at each other.Ted popped his head around the door.“That’s Kerenza here, love,” he said. “Her car’s just pulled up.”The Macmillan nurse, whom Strike had met on his first day there, was a blessing such as he could never have imagined. A slender, freckled woman his age, she brought into the house no aura of death, but of life continuing, simply with more comfort and support. Strike’s own prolonged exposure to the medical profession had inured him to a certain brand of hearty, impersonal cheerfulness, but Kerenza seemed to see Ted and Joan as individuals, not as simple-minded children, and he heard her talking to Ted, the ex-lifeguard, about people trying to take selfies with their backs to the storm waves while she took off her raincoat in the kitchen.“Exactly. Don’t understand the sea, do they? Respect it, or stay well away, my dad would’ve said… Morning, Joan,” she said, coming into the room. “Hello, Cormoran.”“Morning, Kerenza,” said Strike, getting to his feet. “I’ll get out of the way.”“And how’re you feeling today, my love?” the nurse asked Joan.“Not too bad,” said Joan. “I’m just a bit…”She paused, to let her nephew pass out of earshot. As Strike closed the door on the two women, he heard more crunching footsteps on the gravel path outside. Ted, who was reading the local paper at the table, looked up.“Who’s that, now?”A moment later, Dave Polworth appeared at the glass panel in the back door, a large rucksack on his back. He entered, rainswept and grinning.“Morning, Diddy,” he said, and they exchanged the handshake and hug that had become the standard greeting in their later years. “Morning, Ted.”“What’re you doing here?” asked Ted.Polworth swung his rucksack off, undid it and lifted out a couple of polythene-wrapped, frozen dishes onto the table.“Penny baked a couple of casseroles. I’m gonna get some provisions in, wanted to know what you needed.”The flame of pure, practical kindness that burned in Dave Polworth had never been more clearly visible to Strike, except perhaps on his very first day at primary school, when the diminutive Polworth had taken Strike under his protection.“You’re a good lad,” said Ted, moved. “Say thanks very much to Penny, won’t you?”“Yeah, she sent her love and all that,” said Polworth dismissively.“Wanna keep me company while I have a smoke?” Strike asked him.“Go on, then,” said Polworth.“Use the shed,” suggested Ted.So Strike and Polworth headed together across the waterlogged garden, heads bowed against the strong wind and rain, and entered Ted’s shed. Strike lit up with relief.“You been on a diet?” asked Polworth, looking Strike up and down.“Flu and food poisoning.”“Oh, yeah, Lucy said you’d been ill.” Polworth jerked his head in the direction of Joan’s window. “How is she?”“Not great,” said Strike.“How long you down for?”“Depends on the weather. Listen, seriously, I really appreciate everything you’ve been—”“Shut up, you ponce.”“Can I ask another favor?”“Go on.”“Persuade Ted to get a pint with you this lunchtime. He needs to get out of this house for a bit. He’ll do it if he knows I’m with her, but otherwise he won’t leave.”“Consider it done,” said Polworth.“You’re—”“—a prince among men, yeah, I know I am. Arsenal through to the knockout stages, then?”“Yeah,” said Strike. “Bayern Munich next, though.”He’d missed watching his team qualify before Christmas, because he’d been tailing Shifty through the West End. The Champions League, which should have been a pleasure and a distraction, was failing to grip him as it usually did.“Robin running things in London while you’re down here?”“Yeah,” said Strike.She’d texted him earlier, asking for a brief chat about the Bamborough case. He’d replied that he’d call her when he had a moment. He, too, had news on the case, but Margot Bamborough had been missing for nearly forty years and, like Kerenza the nurse, Strike was currently prioritizing the living.When he’d finished his cigarette, they returned to the house to find Ted and Kerenza in conversation in the kitchen.“She’d rather talk to you than to me today,” said Kerenza, smiling at Strike as she shrugged on her raincoat. “I’ll be back tomorrow morning, Ted.”As she moved toward the back door, Polworth said,“Ted, come and have a pint.”“Oh, no, thanks, lad,” said Ted. “I’ll bide here just now.”Kerenza stopped with her hand on the door knob.“That’s a very good idea. Get a bit of fresh air, Ted—fresh water, today, I should say,” she added, as the rain clattered on the roof. “Bye-bye, now.”She left. Ted required a little more persuasion, but finally agreed that he’d join Polworth for a sandwich at the Victory. Once they’d gone, Strike took the local paper off the table and carried it back into the sitting room.He and Joan discussed the flooding, but the pictures of waves battering Mevagissey meant far less to her than they would have a couple of months ago. Strike could tell that Joan’s mind was on the personal, not the general.“What does my horoscope say?” she asked, as he turned the page of the paper.“I didn’t know you believed in that stuff, Joan.”“Don’t know whether I do or not,” said Joan. “I always look, though.”“You’re…” he said, trying to remember her birthday. He knew it was in the summer.“Cancer,” she said, and then she gave a little laugh. “In more ways than one.”Strike didn’t smile.“‘Good time for shaking up your routine,’” he informed her, scanning her horoscope so he could censor out anything depressing, “‘so don’t dismiss new ideas out of hand. Jupiter retrograde encourages spiritual growth.’”“Huh,” said Joan. After a short pause, she said, “I don’t think I’ll be here for my next birthday, Corm.”The words hit him like a punch in the diaphragm.“Don’t say that.”“If I can’t say it to you, who can I say it to?”Her eyes, which had always been a pale forget-me-not blue, were faded now. She’d never spoken to him like this before, as an equal. Always, she’d sought to stand slightly above him, so that from her perspective the six-foot-three soldier might still be her little boy.“I can’t say it to Ted or Lucy, can I?” she said. “You know what they’re like.”“Yeah,” he said, with difficulty.“Afterward… you’ll look after Ted, won’t you? Make sure you see him. He does love you so much.”Fuck.For so long, she’d demanded a kind of falseness from all around her, a rose-tinted view of everything, and now at last she offered simple honesty and plain-speaking and he wished more than anything that he could be simply nodding along to news of some neighborhood scandal. Why hadn’t he visited them more often?“I will, of course,” he said.“I want the funeral at St. Mawes church,” she said quietly, “where I was christened. But I don’t want to be buried, because it’d have to be in the cemetery all the way up in Truro. Ted’ll wear himself out, traveling up and down, taking me flowers. I know him.“We always said we wanted to be together, afterward, but we never made a plan and he won’t talk to me about it now. So, I’ve thought about it, Corm, and I want to be cremated. You’ll make sure this happens, won’t you? Because Ted starts crying every time I try and talk about it and Lucy just won’t listen.”Strike nodded and tried to smile.“I don’t want the family at the cremation. I hate cremations, the curtains and the conveyor belt. You say goodbye to me at the church, then take Ted to the pub and let the undertakers deal with the crematorium bit, all right? Then, after, you can pick up my ashes, take me out on Ted’s boat and scatter me in the sea. And when his turn comes, you can do the same for Ted, and we’ll be together. You and Lucy won’t want to be worrying about looking after graves all the way from London. All right?”The plan had so much of the Joan he knew in it: it was full of practical kindness and forethought, but he hadn’t expected the final touch of the ashes floating away on the tide, no tombstone, no neat dates, instead a melding with the element that had dominated her and Ted’s lives, perched on their seaside town, in thrall to the ocean, except during that strange interlude where Ted, in revolt against his own father, had disappeared for several years into the military police.“All right,” he said, with difficulty.She sank back a little in her chair with an air of relief at having got this off her chest, and smiled at him.“It’s so lovely, having you here.”Over the past few days he’d become used to her short reveries and her non-sequiturs, so it was less of a surprise than it might have been to hear her say, a minute later,“I wish I’d met your Robin.”Strike, whose mind’s eye was still following Joan’s ashes into the sunset, pulled himself together.“I think you’d like her,” he said. “I’m sure she’d like you.”“Lucy says she’s pretty.”“Yeah, she is.”“Poor girl,” murmured Joan. He wondered why. Of course, the knife attack had been reported in the press, when Robin had given evidence against the Shacklewell Ripper.“Funny, you talking about horoscopes,” Strike said, trying to ease Joan off Robin, and funerals, and death. “We’re investigating an old disappearance just now. The bloke who was in charge of the case…”He’d never before shared details of an investigation with Joan, and he wondered why not, now he saw her rapt attention.“But I remember that doctor!” she said, more animated than he had seen her in days. “Margot Bamborough, yes! She had a baby at home…”“Well, that baby’s our client,” said Strike. “Her name’s Anna. She and her partner have got a holiday home in Falmouth.”“That poor family,” said Joan. “Never knowing… and so the officer thought the answer was in the stars?”“Yep,” said Strike. “Convinced the killer was a Capricorn.”“Ted’s a Capricorn.”“Thanks for the tip-off,” said Strike seriously, and she gave a little laugh. “D’you want more tea?”While the kettle boiled, Strike checked his texts. Barclay had sent an update on Two-Times’ girlfriend, but the most recent message was from an unknown number, and he opened it first.Hi Cormoran, it’s your half-sister, Prudence Donleavy, here. Al gave me your number. I do hope you’ll take this in the spirit it’s meant. Let me firstly say that I absolutely understand and sympathize with your reasons for not wanting to join us for the Deadbeats anniversary/album party. You may or may not know that my own journey to a relationship with Dad has been in many ways a difficult one, but ultimately I feel that connecting with him—and, yes, forgiving him—has been an enriching experience. We all hope very much that you’ll reconsider—“What’s the matter?” said Joan.She’d followed him into the kitchen, shuffling, slightly stooped.“What are you doing? I can fetch anything you want—”“I was going to show you where I hide the chocolate biscuits. If Ted knows, he scoffs the lot, and the doctor’s worried about his blood pressure. What were you reading? I know that look. You were angry.”He didn’t know whether her new appreciation for honesty would stretch as far as his father, but somehow, with the wind and rain whipping around them, an air of the confessional had descended upon the house. He told her about the text.“Oh,” said Joan. She pointed at a Tupperware box on a top shelf. “The biscuits are in there.”They returned to the sitting room with the biscuits, which she’d insisted he put on a plate. Some things never changed.“You’ve never met Prudence, have you?” asked Joan, when she was resettled in her chair.“Haven’t met Prudence, or the eldest, Maimie, or the youngest, Ed,” said Strike, trying to sound matter of fact.Joan said nothing for a minute or so, then a great sigh inflated, then collapsed, her thin chest, and she said,“I think you should go to your father’s party, Corm.”“Why?” said Strike. The monosyllable rang in his ears with an adolescent, self-righteous fury. To his slight surprise, she smiled at him.“I know what went on,” she said. “He behaved very badly, but he’s still your father.”“No, he isn’t,” said Strike. “Ted’s my dad.”He’d never said it out loud before. Tears filled Joan’s eyes.“He’d love to hear you say that,” she said softly. “Funny, isn’t it… years ago, years and years, I was just a girl, and I went to see a proper gypsy fortune teller. They used to camp up the road. I thought she’d tell me lots of nice things. You expect them to, don’t you? You’ve paid your money. D’you know what she said?”Strike shook his head.“‘You’ll never have children.’ Just like that. Straight out.”“Well, she got that wrong, didn’t she?” said Strike.Tears started again in Joan’s bleached eyes. Why had he never said these things before, Strike asked himself. It would have been so easy to give her pleasure, and instead he’d held tightly to his divided loyalties, angry that he had to choose, to label, and in doing so, to betray. He reached for her hand and she squeezed it surprisingly tightly.“You should go to that party, Corm. I think your father’s at the heart of… of a lot of things. I wish,” she added, after a short pause, “you had someone to look after you.”“Doesn’t work that way these days, Joan. Men are supposed to be able to look after themselves—in more ways than one,” he added, smiling.“Pretending you don’t need things… it’s just silly,” she said quietly. “What does your horoscope say?”He picked up the paper again and cleared his throat.“‘Sagittarius: with your ruler retrograde, you may find you aren’t your usual happy-go-lucky self…’”
