---

author: ["Robert Galbraith"]
title: "Troubled Blood - index_split_085.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Robert Galbraith - Troubled Blood"
tags: ["said", "robin", "strike", "chip", "think", "right", "back", "could", "douthwaite", "donkey", "see", "looking", "like", "one", "let", "long", "fish", "asked", "last", "thought", "maybe", "never", "sea", "course", "still"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI DUO]
url: /posts/robertgalbraith/TroubledBlood-indexsplit085html

---


Troubled Blood
65Like as a ship, that through the Ocean wydeDirects her course vnto one certaine cost,Is met of many a counter winde and tyde,With which her winged speed is let and crost,And she her selfe in stormie surges tost;Yet making many a borde, and many a bay,Still winneth way, ne hath her compasse lost:Right so it fares with me in this long way,Whose course is often stayd, yet neuer is astray.Edmund SpenserThe Faerie Queene“I’m hungry,” Strike announced, once they stepped down onto the sunny pavement outside the Allardice.“Let’s get some fish and chips,” said Robin.“Now you’re talking,” said Strike enthusiastically, as they headed off toward the end of Scarbrough Avenue.“Cormoran, what makes you think Douthwaite knows something?”“Didn’t you see the way he looked at me, when I asked him about his last appointment with Margot?”“I must’ve been looking at Donna. I was seriously worried she was going to pass out.”“Wish she had,” said Strike.“Strike!”“He was definitely thinking about telling me something, then she bloody ruined it.” As they reached the end of the road, he said, “That was a scared man, and I don’t think he’s only scared of his wife… Do we go left or right?”“Right,” said Robin, so they headed off along Grand Parade, passing a long open-fronted building called Funland, which was full of beeping and flashing video games, claw machines and coin-operated mechanical horses for children to ride. “Are you saying Douthwaite’s guilty?”“I think he feels it,” Strike said, as they wove their way in and out of cheerful, T-shirted families and couples. “He looked at me back there as though he was bursting to tell me something that’s weighing on him.”“If he had actual evidence, why didn’t he tell the police? It would’ve got them off his back.”“I can think of one reason.”“He was scared of the person he thought had killed her?”“Exactly.”“So… Luca Ricci?” said Robin.At that moment, a male voice from the depths of Funland called, “White seven and four, seventy-four.”“Possibly,” said Strike, though he didn’t sound entirely convinced. “Douthwaite and Ricci were living in the same area at the time. Maybe going to the same pubs. I suppose he might’ve heard a rumor about Ricci being out to get her. But that doesn’t fit with the eye-witness accounts, does it? If Douthwaite was issuing the warning, you’d think it’d be Margot looking distressed afterward, whereas we know he was the one who came running out of there looking scared and worried… but my gut feeling is that Douthwaite thinks whatever happened between them at that last appointment is relevant to her disappearance.”The entrance to a well-maintained park on their right was ablaze with petunias. Ahead, on an island in the middle of a traffic island, stood a sixty-foot-high clock tower of brick and stone, with a faintly Gothic appearance, and faces like a miniature Big Ben.“Exactly how many chippies has Skegness got?” Strike asked, as they came to a halt on the busy intersection beside the clock tower. They were standing right beside two establishments which had tables spilling out onto the pavement, and he could see a further two fish and chip shops on the other side of the junction.“I never counted,” said Robin. “I was always more interested in the donkeys. Shall we try here?” she asked, pointing at the nearest free table, which was pistachio green and belonged to Tony’s Chippy (“We Sell on Quality not Price”).“Donkeys?” repeated Strike, grinning, as he sat down on the bench.“That’s right,” said Robin. “Cod or haddock?”“Haddock, please,” said Strike, and Robin headed into the chip shop to order.After a minute or so, looking forward to his chips and enjoying the feeling of sun on his back, Strike became aware that he was still watching Robin, and fixed his eyes instead on a fluttering mass just above him. Even though the top of the yellow railings separating Tony’s from Harry Ramsbottom’s had been fitted with fine spikes to stop birds landing on them, a handful of speckled starlings were doing just that, delicately poised between the needles, and balanced in the iron circles just below them, waiting for the chance to swoop on an abandoned chip.Watching the birds, Strike wondered what the chances were of Douthwaite ringing the number on his card. He was a man with a long track record of hiding from his past, but Strike had definitely read in his face a desperation he’d only ever seen in the faces of men who could no longer bear the pressure of a terrible secret. Idly rubbing his chin, Strike decided to give the man a short period of grace, then either call him again, or even return, unannounced, to Skegness, where he might waylay Douthwaite in the street or a pub, where Donna couldn’t interfere.Strike was still watching the starlings when Robin set down two polystyrene trays, two small wooden forks and two cans of Coke on the table.“Mushy peas,” said Strike, looking at Robin’s tray, where a hefty dollop of what looked like green porridge sat alongside her fish and chips.“Yorkshire caviar,” said Robin, sitting down. “I didn’t think you’d want any.”“You were right,” said Strike, picking up a sachet of tomato sauce while watching with something like revulsion as Robin dipped a chip into the green sludge and ate it.“Soft Southerner, you are,” she said, and Strike laughed.“Don’t ever let Polworth hear you say that,” he said, breaking off a bit of fish with his fingers, dipping it in ketchup and eating it. He then, without warning, broke into song:A good sword and a trusty hand!A merry heart and true!King James’s men shall understand,What Cornish lads can do.“What on earth’s that?” asked Robin, laughing.“First verse of ‘The Song of the Western Men,’” said Strike. “The gist is that Cornishmen are the antithesis of soft bastards. Bloody hell, this is good.”“I know. You don’t get fish and chips like this in London,” said Robin.For a few minutes they ate in silence. The greaseproof paper in which the trays of chips were wrapped was printed with old pages of the Mirror newspaper. Paul Quits the Beatles. There were cartoons too, of the dirty postcard type: a busty blonde in bed with her elderly boss was saying “Business must be booming. You’ve never given me so much overtime.” It reminded her of Gemma the PA, who’d perhaps already called the fake number Robin had given her, and realized that it wasn’t only her ex, “Andy,” who wasn’t all he appeared to be. But Robin had a recording on her phone of everything Gemma knew about Shifty’s insider trading and Pat, at that moment, was transcribing it into a document shorn of anything that might identify the informant. Shifty, Robin hoped, would soon be jobless and, with any luck, in court.A long stretch of fairground rides on the other side of the road hid the sea from her sight. The seats of the distant Ferris wheel were enclosed in casings shaped like pastel-colored hot-air balloons. Nearby stood a gigantic climbing frame for adults, with ropes and swinging tires, a hundred feet up in the air. Watching the harnessed people navigating the obstacles, Robin felt a strange mixture of contentment and melancholy: the possibility of an unknown development in the Bamborough case, the delicious chips and peas, the companionship of Strike and the sunshine were all cheering, but she was also remembering chasing along the out-of-sight beach as a small child, trying to outrun her brother Stephen to reach the donkeys and have first pick. Why did the memory of innocence sting so much, as you got older? Why did the memory of the child who’d thought she was invulnerable, who’d never known cruelty, give her more pain than pleasure?Her childhood had been happy, unlike Strike’s; it ought not to hurt. Over the space of summer weekends spread years apart, Robin and her brothers had competed to ride the black donkey called Noddy, who was doubtless long gone. Was it mortality, then, which turned cheerful memories bittersweet? Maybe, Robin thought, she’d bring Annabel here when she was old enough, and treat her to her first donkey ride. It was a nice idea, but she doubted Stephen and Jenny would see Skegness as a desirable weekend destination. Annabel’s great-aunt had moved away from Boston: there was no longer any family connection to the area. Times changed, and so did childhoods.“You all right?” said Strike, watching Robin’s face.“Fine,” she said. “Just thinking… I’m going to be thirty in a few weeks.”Strike snorted.“Well, you’re getting no sympathy from me,” he said. “I’ll be forty the month after.”He snapped open his can of Coke and drank. Robin watched a family pass, all four eating ice creams, accompanied by a waddling dachshund that was nosing the Union Jack carrier bag which swung from the father’s hand.“D’you think Scotland’s going to leave?”“Go for independence? Maybe,” said Strike. “The polls are close. Barclay thinks it could happen. He was telling me about some old mates of his at home. They sound just like Polworth. Same hate figures, same promises everything’ll be rainbows and unicorns if only they cut themselves free of London. Anyone pointing out pitfalls or difficulties is scaremongering. Experts don’t know anything. Facts lie. ‘Things can’t be any worse than they are.’”Strike put several chips in his mouth, chewed, swallowed, then said,“But life’s taught me things can always get worse than they are. I thought I had it hard, then they wheeled a bloke onto the ward who’d had both his legs and his genitals blown off.”He’d never before talked to Robin about the aftermath of his life-changing injury. Indeed, he rarely mentioned his missing leg. A barrier had definitely fallen, Robin thought, since their whisky-fueled talk in the dark office.“Everyone wants a single, simple solution,” he said, now finishing his last few chips. “One weird trick to lose belly fat. I’ve never clicked on it, but I understand the appeal.”“Well, reinvention’s such an inviting idea, isn’t it?” said Robin, her eyes on the fake hot-air balloons, circling on their prescribed course. “Look at Douthwaite, changing his name and finding a new woman every few years. Reinventing a whole country would feel amazing. Being part of that.”“Yeah,” said Strike. “Of course, people think if they subsume themselves in something bigger, and that changes, they’ll change too.”“Well, there’s nothing wrong with wanting to be better, or different, is there?” asked Robin. “Nothing wrong with wanting to improve things?”“Not at all,” said Strike. “But people who fundamentally change are rare, in my experience, because it’s bloody hard work compared to going on a march or waving a flag. Have we met a single person on this case who’s radically different to the person they were forty years ago?”“I don’t know… I think I’ve changed,” said Robin, then felt embarrassed to have said it out loud.Strike looked at her without smiling for the space it took him to chew and swallow a chip, then said,“Yeah. But you’re exceptional, aren’t you?”And before Robin had time for anything other than a slight blush, Strike said,“Are you not finishing those chips?”“Help yourself,” said Robin, shoving the tray toward him. She pulled her phone out of her pocket. “I’ll look up that one weird tip to lose belly fat.”Strike smirked. After wiping her hands on her paper napkin, Robin checked her emails.“Have you seen this from Vanessa Ekwensi? She’s copied you in.”“What?”“She might know someone who could replace Morris… woman called Michelle Greenstreet… she wants to leave the police. She’s been in eight years,” said Robin, scrolling slowly down the email, “not enjoying response policing… she’s in Manchester… wants to relocate to London, very keen on the detective side…”“Sounds promising,” said Strike. “Let’s schedule an interview. She’s already cleared the first hurdle with flying colors.”“What hurdle?” said Robin, looking up.“Doubt she’s ever sent a dick pic.”He patted his pockets, pulled out his packet of Benson & Hedges but found it empty.“I need more fags, let’s—”“Wait,” said Robin, who was still staring down at her mobile. “Oh my God. Cormoran—Gloria Conti’s emailed me.”“You’re kidding,” said Strike. Having partly risen, he now let himself fall back onto the bench.“‘Dear Miss Ellacott,’” Robin read aloud, “‘I’m sorry I haven’t answered your emails. I wasn’t aware you were trying to contact me and have only just found out. If convenient, I’d be available to talk to you tomorrow evening at 7pm. Yours sincerely…’ and she’s given her phone number,” said Robin, looking up at Strike, astonished. “How can she only just have found out? It’s been months of me emailing her without any response… unless Anna’s prompted her?”“Could be,” said Strike. “Which doesn’t suggest someone who wants the investigation over.”“Of course she doesn’t,” said Robin. “But for sanity’s sake, you’d have to draw the line somewhere.”“So what does that make us?”Robin smiled and shook her head.“Dedicated?”“Conti: last person to see Margot alive. Closest person to Margot at the practice…”“I’m thanking her,” said Robin, who was typing fast onto her mobile, “and agreeing to the call tomorrow.”“We could do it from the office, together,” said Strike. “Maybe FaceTime her, if she’s agreeable?”“I’ll ask,” said Robin, still typing.They set off a few minutes later in search of cigarettes, Robin reflecting on how casually she’d just agreed to go into work on a Saturday evening, so she could conduct Gloria’s interview with Strike. There was no angry Matthew at home any more, furious about her committing herself to long hours, suspicious about what she and Strike were up to, alone in the office in the evening. And she thought back to Matthew’s refusal to look her in the eye across the table at the mediation. He’d changed his partner, and his firm; he’d soon be a father. His life had changed, but had he?They turned the corner to find themselves facing what Strike mentally categorized as “acres of tat.” As far as the eye could see were racks of merchandise laid out on the pavement: beach balls, keyrings, cheap jewelry, sunglasses, buckets of candyfloss, fudge and plush toys.“Look at that,” said Robin suddenly, pointing to her right. A bright yellow sign read: Your Life Within Your Hands. On the dark glass of the door below was written: Palm Reader. Clairvoyant, along with a circular chart, all twelve signs of the zodiac represented by the glyphs around a central sun.“What?” said Strike.“Well, you’ve had your chart done. Maybe I’d like mine.”“Fuck’s sake,” muttered Strike, and they walked on, Robin smiling to herself.She waited outside, examining postcards, while Strike entered the newsagent’s to buy cigarettes.Waiting to be served, Strike was seized by a sudden, quixotic impulse (stimulated no doubt by the gaudy color all around him, by the sunshine and sticks of rock, the rattle and clang of amusement arcades and a stomach full of some of the best fish and chips he’d ever eaten) to buy Robin a toy donkey. He came to his senses almost before the idea had formed: what was he, a kid on a daytime date with his first girlfriend? Emerging again into the sunlight as he left the shop, he noted that he couldn’t have bought a donkey if he’d wanted to. There wasn’t a single one in sight: the bins full of plushes held only unicorns.“Back to the car, then?” said Robin.“Yeah,” said Strike, ripping the cellophane off his cigarettes, but then he said, “we’ll go down to the sea before we head off, shall we?”“OK,” said Robin, surprised. “Er—why?”“Just fancy it. It’s wrong, being by the sea without actually laying eyes on it.”“Is this a Cornish thing?” asked Robin, as they headed back to Grand Parade.“Maybe,” said Strike, lighting the cigarette between his teeth. He took a drag on his cigarette, exhaled then sang,And when we come to London Wall,A pleasant sight to view,Come forth! come forth! ye cowards all:Here’s men as good as you.“‘The Song of the Western Men?’”“That’s the one.”“Why d’you think they feel the need to tell Londoners they’re just as good? Isn’t that a given?”“Just London, isn’t it?” said Strike, as they crossed the road. “Pisses everyone off.”“I love London.”“Me too. But I can see why it pisses everyone off.”They passed a fountain with a statue in the middle of the Jolly Fisherman, that rotund, bearded sailor skipping along in high wind, who’d been used on posters advertising Skegness for nearly a century, and progressed across a smooth paved area toward the beach.At last they saw what Strike had felt the need to see: a wide expanse of flat ocean, the color of chalcedony, beneath a periwinkle sky. Far out at sea, spoiling the horizon, were an army of tall white wind turbines, and while Strike personally enjoyed the chill breeze coming off the wide ocean, he understood at last why Robin had brought a scarf.Strike smoked in silence, the cool wind making no difference whatsoever to his curly hair. He was thinking about Joan. It hadn’t occurred to him until this moment that her plan for her final resting place had given them a grave to visit any time they were at the British coast. Cornish-born, Cornish-bred, Joan had known that this need to reconnect with the sea lived in all of them. Now, every time they made their way to the coast they paid her tribute, along with the obeisance due to the waves.“They were Joan’s favorites, pink roses,” he said, after a while. “What you sent, to the funeral.”“Oh, really?” said Robin. “I… well, I had a kind of picture in my head of Joan, from things you’d told me, and… pink roses seemed to suit her.”“If the agency ever fails,” said Strike, as they both turned away from the sea, “you could come back to Skegness and set yourself up as a clairvoyant.”“Bit niche,” said Robin, as they walked back toward the car park. “Guessing dead people’s favorite flowers.”“No donkeys,” said Strike, glancing back over his shoulder at the beach.“Never mind,” said Robin kindly. “I think you’d have been a bit heavy.”
