---

author: ["Robert Galbraith"]
title: "Troubled Blood - index_split_038.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Robert Galbraith - Troubled Blood"
tags: ["said", "strike", "shanker", "like", "bag", "one", "ricci", "assistant", "could", "bunsen", "something", "fuckin", "mucky", "old", "back", "christmas", "looked", "flower", "head", "know", "perfume", "got", "thought", "man", "boy"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI DUO]
url: /posts/robertgalbraith/TroubledBlood-indexsplit038html

---


Troubled Blood
27His name was Talus, made of yron mold,Immoueable, resistlesse, without end.Who in his hand an yron flale did hould,With which he thresht out falshood, and did truth vnfould.Edmund SpenserThe Faerie QueeneSome two and a half hours later, Strike stood beneath the awning of Hamleys on Regent Street, shopping bags by his feet, telling himself firmly that he was fine in spite of ample empirical evidence that he was, in fact, shivering. Cold rain was spattering all around him onto the dirty pavements, where it was kicked out of puddles by the marching feet of hundreds of passing pedestrians. It splashed over curbs in the wake of passing vehicles and dripped down the back of Strike’s collar, though he stood, theoretically, beneath shelter.While checking his phone yet again for some sign that Shanker hadn’t forgotten they were supposed to be meeting for a drink, he lit a cigarette, but his raw throat didn’t appreciate the sudden ingestion of smoke. With a foul taste in his mouth, he ground out the cigarette after one drag. There was no message from Shanker, so Strike picked up his bulky shopping bags and set off again, his throat burning every time he swallowed.He’d imagined optimistically that he might have finished all his shopping within two hours, but midday had come and gone and he still wasn’t done. How did people decide what to buy, when the speakers were all shrieking Christmas tunes at you, and the shops were full of too much choice, and all of it looked like junk? Endless processions of women kept ranging across his path, choosing items with apparently effortless ease. Were they genetically programmed to seek and find the right gift? Was there nobody he could pay to do this for him?His eyes felt heavy, his throat ached and his nose had started running. Unsure where he was going, or what he was looking for, he walked blindly onwards. He, who usually had an excellent sense of direction, kept turning the wrong way, becoming disorientated. Several times he knocked into carefully stacked piles of Christmas merchandise, or buffeted smaller people, who scowled and muttered and scurried away.The bulky bags he was carrying contained three identical Nerf blasters for his nephews; large plastic guns which shot foam bullets, which Strike had decided to buy on the dual grounds that he would have loved one when he was eleven, and the assistant had assured him they were one of the must-have gifts of the year. He’d bought his Uncle Ted a sweater because he couldn’t think of anything else, his brother-in-law a box of golf balls and a bottle of gin on the same principle, but he still had the trickiest gifts to buy—the ones for the women: Lucy, Joan and Robin.His mobile rang.“Fuck.”He hobbled sideways out of the crowd and, standing beside a mannequin wearing a reindeer sweater, shook himself free from a few of his bags so that he could pull out his mobile.“Strike.”“Bunsen, I’m near Shakespeare’s ’Ead on Great Marlborough Street. See you there in twenty?”“Great,” said Strike, who was becoming hoarse. “I’m just round the corner.”Another wave of sweat passed over him, soaking scalp and chest. It was, some part of his brain acknowledged, just possible that he had caught Barclay’s flu, and if that was the case, he mustn’t give it to his severely immunosuppressed aunt. He picked up his shopping bags again and made his way back to the slippery pavement outside.The black and white timbered frontage of Liberty rose up to his right as he headed along Great Marlborough Street. Buckets and boxes of flowers lay all around the main entrance, temptingly light and portable, and already wrapped; so easy to carry to the Shakespeare’s Head and take on to the office afterward. But, of course, flowers wouldn’t do this time. Sweating worse than ever, Strike turned into the store, dumped his bags once more on the floor beside an array of silk scarves, and called Ilsa.“Hey, Oggy,” said Ilsa.“What can I get Robin for Christmas?” he said. It was becoming difficult to talk: his throat felt raw.“Are you all right?”“I’m fantastic. Give me an idea. I’m in Liberty.”“Um…” said Ilsa. “Let’s th… ooh, I know what you can get her. She wants some new perfume. She didn’t like the stuff she—”“I don’t need backstory,” said Strike ungraciously. “That’s great. Perfume. What does she wear?”“I’m trying to tell you, Oggy,” said Ilsa. “She wants a change. Choose her something new.”“I can’t smell,” said Strike, impatiently, “I’ve got a cold.”But this basic problem aside, he was afraid that a perfume he’d personally picked out was too intimate a gift, like that green dress of a few years back. He was looking for something like flowers, but not flowers, something that said “I like you,” but not “this is what I’d like you to smell like.”“Just go to an assistant and say ‘I want to buy a perfume for someone who wears Philosykos but wants a—’”“She what?” said Strike. “She wears what?”“Philosykos. Or she did.”“Spell it,” said Strike, his head thumping. Ilsa did so.“So I just ask an assistant, and they’ll give me something like it?”“That’s the idea,” said Ilsa patiently.“Great,” said Strike. “Appreciate it. Speak soon.”The assistant thought you’d like it.Yeah, he’d say that. The assistant thought you’d like it would effectively de-personalize the gift, turn it into something almost as mundane as flowers, but it would still show he’d taken some care, given it some thought. Picking up his carrier bags again, he limped toward an area he could see in the distance that looked as though it was lined with bottles.The perfume department turned out to be small, about the size of Strike’s office. He sidled into the crowded space, passing beneath a cupola painted with stars, to find himself surrounded by shelves laden with fragile cargos of glass bottles, some of which wore ruffs, or patterns like lace; others which looked like jewels, or the kind of phial suitable for a love potion. Apologizing as he forced people aside with his Nerf guns, his gin and his golf balls, he met a slim, black-clad man who asked, “Can I help you?” At this moment Strike’s eye fell on a range of bottled scents which were identically packed with black labels and tops. They looked functional and discreet, with no overt suggestion of romance.“I’d like one of those,” he croaked, pointing.“Right,” said the assistant. “Er—”“It’s for someone who used to wear Philosykos. Something like that.”“OK,” said the assistant, leading Strike over to the display. “Well, what about—”“No,” said Strike, before the assistant could remove the top of the tester. The perfume was called Carnal Flower. “She said she didn’t like that one,” Strike added, with the conscious aim of appearing less strange. “Are any of the others like Philo—”“She might like Dans Tes Bras?” suggested the assistant, spraying a second bottle onto a smelling strip.“Doesn’t that mean—?”“‘In your arms,’” said the assistant.“No,” said Strike, without taking the smelling strip. “Are any of the others like Phi—?”“Musc Ravageur?”“You know what, I’ll leave it,” said Strike, sweat prickling anew beneath his shirt. “Which exit is nearest the Shakespeare’s Head?”The unsmiling assistant pointed Strike toward the left. Muttering apologies, Strike edged back out past women who were studying bottles and spraying on testers, turned a corner and saw, with relief, the pub where he was meeting Shanker, which lay just beyond the glass doors of a room full of chocolates.Chocolates, he thought, slowing down and incidentally impeding a group of harried women. Everyone likes chocolates. Sweat was now coming over him in waves, and he seemed to feel simultaneously hot and cold. He approached a table piled high with chocolate boxes, looking for the most expensive one, one that would show appreciation and friendship. Trying to choose a flavor, he thought he recalled a conversation about salted caramel, so he took the largest box he could find and headed for the till.Five minutes later, another bag hanging from his hands, Strike emerged at the end of Carnaby Street, where music-themed Christmas decorations hung between the buildings. In Strike’s now fevered state, the invisible heads suggested by giant headphones and sunglasses seemed sinister rather than festive. Struggling with his bags, he backed into the Shakespeare’s Head, where fairy lights twinkled and chatter and laughter filled the air.“Bunsen,” said a voice, just inside the door.Shanker had secured a table. Shaven-headed, gaunt, pale and heavily tattooed, Shanker had an upper lip that was fixed in a permanent Elvis-style sneer, due to the scar that ran up toward his cheekbone. He was absentmindedly clicking the fingers of the hand not holding his pint, a tic he’d had since his teens. No matter where he was, Shanker managed to emanate an aura of danger, projecting the idea that he might, on the slightest provocation, resort to violence. Crowded as the pub was, nobody had chosen to share his table. Incongruously, or so it seemed to Strike, Shanker, too, had shopping bags at his feet.“What’s wrong wiv ya?” Shanker said, as Strike sank down opposite him and disposed of his own bags beneath the table. “Ya look like shit.”“Nothing,” said Strike, whose nose was now running profusely and whose pulse seemed to have become erratic. “Cold or something.”“Well, keep it the fuck away from me,” said Shanker. “Last fing we fuckin’ need at home. Zahara’s only just got over the fuckin’ flu. Wanna pint?”“Er—no,” said Strike. The thought of beer was currently repellent. “Couldn’t get me some water, could you?”“Fuck’s sake,” muttered Shanker, as he got up.When Shanker had returned with a glass of water and sat down again, Strike said, without preamble,“I wanted to ask you about an evening, must’ve been round about ’92, ’93. You needed to get into town, you had a car, but you couldn’t drive it yourself. You’d done something to your arm. It was strapped up.”Shanker shrugged impatiently, as much as to say, who could be expected to remember something so trivial? Shanker’s life had been an endless series of injuries received and inflicted, and of needing to get places to deliver cash, drugs, threats or beatings. Periods of imprisonment had done nothing but temporarily change the environment in which he conducted business. Half the boys with whom he had associated in his teens were dead, most killed by knives or overdoses. One cousin had died in a police car chase, and another had been shot through the back of the head, his killer never caught.“You had to make a delivery,” Strike went on, trying to jog Shanker’s memory. “Jiffy bag full of something—drugs, cash, I don’t know. You came round the squat looking for someone to drive you, urgently. I said I’d do it. We went to a strip club in Soho. It was called Teezers.”“Teezers, yeah,” said Bunsen. “Long gone, Teezers. Closed ten, fifteen year ago.”“When we got there, there was a group of men standing on the pavement, heading inside. One of them was a bald black guy—”“Your fucking memory,” said Shanker, amused. “You could do a stage act. ‘Bunsen, the Amazing Memory Man’—”“—and there was a big Latin-looking bloke with dyed black hair and sideburns. We pulled up, you wound down the window and he came over and put his hand on the door to talk to you. He had eyes like a basset hound and he was wearing a massive gold ring with a lion’s—”“Mucky Ricci,” said Shanker.“You remember him?”“Just said ’is name, Bunsen, d’in I?”“Yeah. Sorry. What was his real name, d’you know?”“Nico, Niccolo Ricci, but everyone called ’im ‘Mucky.’ Old-school villain. Pimp. ’E owned a few strip clubs, ran a couple of knocking shops. Real bit of old London, ’e was. Got his start as part of the Sabini gang, when ’e was a kid.”“How’re you spelling Ricci? R—I—C—C—I, right?”“What’s this about?”Strike tugged the copy of Whatever Happened to Margot Bamborough? out of his coat pocket, turned to the photographs of the practice Christmas party and held it out to Shanker, who took it suspiciously. He squinted for a moment at the partial picture of the man with the lion ring, then passed the book back to Strike.“Well?” said Strike.“Yeah, looks like ’im. Where’s that?”“Clerkenwell. A doctors’ Christmas party.”Shanker looked mildly surprised.“Well, Clerkenwell, that was the old Sabini stamping ground, warn’t it? And I s’pose even gangsters need doctors sometimes.”“It was a party,” said Strike. “Not a surgery. Why would Mucky Ricci be at a doctors’ party?”“Dunno,” said Shanker. “Anyone need killing?”“Funny you should ask that,” said Strike. “I’m investigating the disappearance of a woman who was there that night.”Shanker looked sideways at him.“Mucky Ricci’s gaga,” he said quietly. “Old man now, innit.”“Still alive, though?”“Yer. ’E’s in an ’ome.”“How d’you know that?”“Done a bit o’ business wiv ’is eldest, Luca.”“Boys in the same line of work as their old man?”“Well, there ain’t no Little Italy gang any more, is there? But they’re villains, yeah,” said Shanker. Then he leaned across the table and said quietly, “Listen to me, Bunsen. You do not wanna screw wiv Mucky Ricci’s boys.”It was the first time Shanker had ever given Strike such a warning.“You go fuckin’ wiv their old man, you try pinnin’ anyfing on ’im, the Ricci boys’ll skin ya. Understand? They don’t fuckin’ care. They’ll torch your fuckin’ office. They’ll cut up your girl.”“Tell me about Mucky. Anything you know.”“Did you ’ear what I just said, Bunsen?”“Just tell me about him, for fuck’s sake.”Shanker scowled.“’Ookers. Porn. Drugs, but girls was ’is main thing. Same era as George Cornell, Jimmy Humphries, all those boys. That gold ring ’e wore, ’e used to say Danny the Lion gave it ’im. Danny Leo, the mob boss in New York. Claimed they were related. Dunno if it’s true.”“Ever run across anyone called Conti?” Strike asked. “Probably a bit younger than Ricci.”“Nope. But Luca Ricci’s a fuckin’ psycho,” said Shanker. “When did this bint disappear?”“1974,” said Strike.He expected Shanker to say “Nineteen seventy fucking four?,” to pour scorn on the likelihood of finding any kind of solution after all this time, but his old friend merely frowned at him, his clicking fingers recalling the relentless progress of the deathwatch beetle, and it occurred to the detective that Shanker knew more about old crimes and the long shadows they cast than many policemen.“Name of Margot Bamborough,” said Strike. “She vanished on her way to the pub. Nothing ever found, no handbag, door keys, nothing. Never seen again.”Shanker sipped his beer.“Professional job,” he said.“That occurred to me,” said Strike. “Hence—”“Fuck your fucking ‘hence,’” said Shanker fiercely. “If the bint was taken out by Mucky Ricci or any of his boys, she’s past fuckin’ savin,’ in’t she? I know you like bein’ the boy scout, mate, but the last guy who pissed off Luca Ricci, his wife opened the door few days later and got acid thrown in her face. Blind in one eye, now.“You wanna drop this, Bunsen. If Mucky Ricci’s the answer, you need to stop askin’ the question.”
