---

author: ["Robert Galbraith"]
title: "Troubled Blood - index_split_084.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Robert Galbraith - Troubled Blood"
tags: ["said", "strike", "douthwaite", "donna", "robin", "one", "got", "know", "wife", "back", "like", "bloody", "could", "told", "get", "hand", "never", "time", "name", "anything", "looking", "nothing", "room", "last", "looked"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI DUO]
url: /posts/robertgalbraith/TroubledBlood-indexsplit084html

---


Troubled Blood
64     … his hand did quake,And tremble like a leafe of Aspin greene,And troubled blood through his pale face was seeneTo come, and goe with tidings from the heart,As it a ronning messenger had beene.Edmund SpenserThe Faerie Queene“Well,” said Strike, getting into the Land Rover next morning.They beamed at each other: for a moment, Robin thought she saw the idea of hugging her cross Strike’s mind, but instead he held out his hand, and shook hers.“My Christ, you wait a year for a breakthrough…”Robin laughed, put the Land Rover into gear and pulled out onto the road. The day was unusually hot: she was driving in sunglasses, yet Strike noted a scarf protruding from the bag behind her seat.“Don’t think you’re going to need that. Proper summer weather,” he said, looking out at the clear sky.“We’ll see,” said Robin skeptically. “We used to visit Skegness when we were kids. Mum’s sister used to live in Boston, up the road. There’s usually a bracing breeze off the North Sea.”“So, I read the email,” said Strike, referring to the message Robin had forwarded him, which laid out both the terms and conditions of him interviewing Dennis Creed, and the reasoning which had led the authorities to permit Strike to do it.“What did you think?” Robin asked.“Other than being bloody astounded you pulled this off—”“It took ages.”“I’m not surprised. Other than that, I won’t lie… I’m feeling the pressure.”“You mean, because of the Tuckers?”“Yeah,” said Strike, opening the window so he could light a cigarette. “Anna doesn’t know I’m getting this shot, so she won’t get their hopes up, but that poor bastard Tucker…”Absolute secrecy about the interview, including signing a non-disclosure agreement that guaranteed Strike would never talk to the press about it, had been the first precondition set by the authorities.“He really wants it to be you,” said Robin. “Tucker. He says Creed’s got a big ego and he’ll want to meet you. And the psychiatrists must agree, mustn’t they, or they wouldn’t be allowing it? Brian Tucker says Creed always saw himself as high status, and deserving of associating with famous, successful people.”“It isn’t a psychiatrist’s job to decide whether I’ll be able to get anything out of him,” said Strike. “I’d imagine all they’ll care about is whether I’m going to rile him up. You don’t get put in Broadmoor for being mildly eccentric.”Strike was silent for a long time, looking out of the window, and Robin too remained quiet, not wanting to interrupt his train of thought. When at last Strike spoke again, he sounded matter of fact, and focused on the plan for Skegness.“I looked up the B&B on TripAdvisor. It’s called the Allardice, which is his wife’s maiden name. We won’t walk in there cold, because if he isn’t there and the wife smells a rat, she can call him and warn him not to come back, so we’ll park, get ourselves into a position where we can see the building, and ring him. If he’s there, we walk straight in before he’s got a chance to run—or catch him as he leaves, as the case might be. And if he isn’t in, we wait.”“For how long?” said Robin.“I’d like to say ‘as long as it takes,’” said Strike, “but we’re not actually being paid for this, so I’ve got to be back in town on Monday.”“I could stay behind,” suggested Robin.“I don’t think so,” said Strike.“Sorry,” said Robin, immediately regretting the suggestion, afraid that Strike might think she was simply after another weekend away in a hotel. “I know we’re short-staffed—”“It isn’t that. You were the one who pointed out women have a habit of dying or disappearing around Steve Douthwaite. Could be a case of bad luck, but on the other hand… three different surnames is a lot for a man with nothing to hide. I’m taking the lead on this one.”They arrived in the small seaside town at eleven, leaving the Land Rover in a car park beside Skegness Bowl, an enormous red-walled seafront bowling alley. Strike could smell and taste the sea as he got out of the car, and turned instinctively toward it, but the ocean was invisible from where he stood. Instead he found himself looking at a manmade waterway of a murky green, along which a laughing young woman and her boyfriend were pedaling a dinghy-sized boat. The driver’s door slammed and Strike turned to see Robin, still in sunglasses, wrapping the scarf around her neck.“Told you,” she said to the mystified Strike, to whom the day felt unequivocally hot. Not for the first time wondering what it was about women and their bizarre ability to feel non-existent chills, Strike lit up, waited beside the Land Rover while Robin bought a parking permit, then walked with her up to Grand Parade, a wide street that ran along the seafront.“‘The Savoy,’” said Strike, smirking as he read the names of the larger hotels, whose upper windows could surely see the distant sea. “‘The Quorn.’ ‘The Chatsworth.’”“Don’t jeer,” said Robin. “I used to love coming to Skegness when I was a kid.”“The Allardice should be up there,” Strike said, as they crossed the road, pointing up broad Scarbrough Avenue. “Yeah, that’s it, the one with the blue awning.”They paused on the corner, beside an enormous mock Tudor hotel which boasted the Jubilee Carvery and Café. Early-morning drinkers of both beer and coffee were sitting at outside tables, enjoying the sunshine.“Perfect place to keep an eye out,” said Strike, pointing at one of these pavement tables. “I could use a cup of tea.”“OK, I’ll order,” said Robin. “I need the loo, anyway. Are you going to call him or d’you want me to do it?”“I will,” said Strike, already sinking onto one of the chairs, and taking out his mobile.As Robin disappeared into the bar, Strike lit a cigarette, then keyed in the Allardice’s number, his eyes on the front of the B&B. It stood in a row of eight tall red buildings, several of which had been converted into small boarding houses and had similar scalloped PVC awnings over the entrances. Spotless white net curtains hung at almost every window.“Morning, the Allardice,” said a Scottish woman, who sounded on the irritable side of brisk.“Steve there?” said Strike, faking casualness and confidence.“That you, Barry love?”“Yeah,” said Strike.“He’s on his way now,” she said. “We only had a small, sorry. But do me a favor, Barry, and don’t hold him up, because there are four beds to change here and he’s supposed to be getting me more milk.”“Righto,” said Strike, and not wanting to speak another syllable that might reveal him to be anyone other than Barry, he hung up.“Is he there?” asked Robin anxiously, dropping into the seat opposite Strike. She’d washed her hands in the bathroom, but they were still damp, because she’d been in such a hurry to get back to Strike.“No,” said Strike, knocking his cigarette ash into the small pink metal bucket placed on the table for that purpose. “He’s delivering something to a bloke up the road and will be back shortly, bringing milk.”“Oh,” said Robin quietly, turning to look over her shoulder at the Allardice’s royal blue awning, on which the name was inscribed in curly white lettering.The barman brought out two metal pots and china teacups, and the detectives drank their tea in silence, Strike keeping a watchful eye on the Allardice, Robin on Grand Parade. The sea was blocked from her view by the wide, multicolored frontage of the entrance to Skegness Pier, which advertised, among other attractions, the optimistically named Hollywood Bar and Diner. Elderly people rode mobility scooters up and down Grand Parade. Families strolled past, eating ice cream. Plume-tailed Maltese, fat pugs and panting chihuahuas trotted over the hot pavements alongside their owners.“Cormoran,” muttered Robin suddenly.A man had just turned the corner into Scarbrough Avenue, a heavy carrier bag dangling from his hand. His gray hair was close cropped around the ears, but a few strands had been combed over a wide expanse of sweaty forehead. His round shoulders and hangdog look gave him the air of a man whom life had ground down to a sullen obedience. The same turquoise T-shirt he’d worn in the karaoke picture was stretched tightly over his beer belly. Douthwaite crossed the road, climbed the three steps leading to the Allardice’s front door and, with a flash of sun on glass, disappeared from view.“Have you paid for this?” Strike asked, downing the rest of his tea and putting his empty cup back onto the saucer.“Yes.”“Then let’s go,” said Strike, dropping his cigarette into the metal bucket and pulling himself to his feet, “before he can disappear upstairs and start changing beds.”They crossed the road as fast as Strike could walk and headed up the front steps, which had been painted pale blue. Baskets of purple petunias hung beneath the ground-floor windows and an assortment of stickers adorned the glass portion of the front door, one of which announced that this was a three-star residence, another asking guests to wipe their feet.A tinkling bell announced their arrival. The deserted hall was narrow, its stairs carpeted in dark blue and green tartan. They waited beside a table laden with leaflets about local attractions, breathing in a combination of fried food and a powerful rose-scented air-freshener.“… and Paula’s got new tubes in her sunbeds,” said a Scottish voice, and a woman with short hair dyed canary yellow emerged through a door to the right. A deep vertical line was graven down the middle of her forehead. Barelegged, she wore an apron decorated with a Highland cow over her T-shirt and denim skirt, and a pair of Dr. Scholl’s sandals.“We’ve no vacancies, sorry,” she said.“Are you Donna?” asked Strike. “We were hoping for a word with Steve.”“What about?”“We’re private detectives,” said Strike, pulling out his wallet to hand her a card, “and we’re investigating—”A hugely obese old lady came into view on the landing above them. She was clad in shocking-pink leggings and a T-shirt bearing the slogan “The More People I Meet, The More I Like My Dog.” Panting audibly, she began a sideways descent, both hands clutching the banister.“—a missing person case,” Strike finished quietly, as he handed Donna his card.At that moment, Steve Douthwaite emerged from behind his wife, a pile of towels in his arms. Close up, his dark eyes were bloodshot and puffy. Every feature had coarsened with age and, possibly, drink. His wife’s demeanor, the card in her hand and the presence of the two strangers now looking at him brought him to a halt, the dark eyes frightened above his pile of towels.“Cormoran Strike?” murmured Donna, reading the card. “Aren’t you the one…”The old lady, who was barely halfway down the stairs, was now audibly wheezing.“Get in here,” muttered Donna, pointing Strike and Robin toward the room from which she’d just emerged. “And you,” she snapped at her husband.They entered a small public sitting room, with a wall-mounted TV, a sparsely stocked bookcase and a miserable-looking spider plant sitting in a pedestalled urn. Through an arch was a breakfast room, where five tightly packed dining tables were being wiped down by a discontented-looking young woman in glasses, who sped up appreciably when she realized Donna had returned. Robin guessed that they were mother and daughter. Though the younger woman was dark rather than blonde, life had carved an identical groove of dissatisfaction in her forehead.“Leave that, Kirsty,” said Donna abruptly. “Take these towels upstairs, will you? And close the door.”Kirsty relieved Douthwaite silently of his pile of towels and left the room, her slides slapping the bottoms of her sockless feet. The door clicked shut behind her.“Sit down,” Donna instructed Strike and Robin, who did so, on a small sofa.Douthwaite took up a standing position, arms folded, with his back to the TV. Frowning slightly, his eyes flickered over Strike and Robin and back to his wife. The sunlight filtering through the net curtains cast an unforgiving light over his hair, which looked like wispy strands of steel wool.“He’s the one who caught that Shacklewell Ripper,” Donna said to her husband, jerking her head at Strike. “Why’s he after you?” Her voice rose in both pitch and volume. “Been dicking around with the wrong woman again, have you? Have you?”“What?” said Douthwaite, but it was obvious this was a stalling tactic: he had understood well enough. His right forearm was tattooed with an hourglass, and around it was wrapped a ribbon with the words “Never Enough.”“Mr. Douthwaite,” Strike began, but Douthwaite said quickly,“Diamond! It’s Diamond!”“Why’re you calling him Douthwaite?” asked Donna.“I’m sorry,” said Strike insincerely. “My mistake. Your husband was born Steven Douthwaite, as I’m sure you—”But Donna clearly hadn’t known this. She turned, astonished, from Strike to Douthwaite, who’d frozen, mouth slightly open.“Douthwaite?” repeated Donna. She turned on her husband. “You told me your name used to be Jacks!”“I—”“When were you Douthwaite?”“—ages—”“Why didn’t you tell me?”“I—what’s it matter?”The bell tinkled again and a group of people was heard out in the hall. Still looking shocked and angry, Donna strode outside to see what was needed, her wooden-soled sandals banging over the tiles. The moment she’d disappeared, Douthwaite addressed Strike.“What d’you want?”“We’ve been hired by Dr. Margot Bamborough’s daughter, to look into her disappearance,” said Strike.The parts of Douthwaite’s face that weren’t ruddy with broken veins blanched.The enormous old lady who’d been descending the stairs now walked into the room, her wide, innocent face demonstrating total immunity to the atmosphere within.“Which way’s the seal sanctuary?”“End of the road,” said Douthwaite hoarsely. “Turn left.”She sidled out of the room again. The bell outside tinkled.“Listen,” said Douthwaite quickly, as the sound of his wife’s footsteps grew louder again. “You’re wasting your time. I don’t know anything about Margot Bamborough.”“Perhaps you could have a look over your old police statement, at least,” asked Strike, taking a copy out of his inside pocket.“What?” said Donna, now back in the room. “What police statement? Oh, for Christ’s sake,” she said, as the bell tinkled again, and she clunked back out of the room and bellowed up the stairs, “Kirsty! KIRSTY!”“That doctor,” Douthwaite said, looking at Strike through bloodshot eyes, his forehead sweaty, “it all happened forty-odd years ago, I don’t know anything about what happened, I never did.”The harried Donna reappeared.“Kirsty’ll mind the front door,” she said, glaring at her husband. “We’ll go upstairs. Lochnagar’s empty. We can’t go in ours,” she added to Strike and Robin, pointing toward the basement, “me grandkids are down there, playing computer games.”Douthwaite hitched up his waistband and threw a wild look outside the net curtains, as though contemplating flight.“Come on,” said Donna fiercely, and with a return to his hangdog look, he followed his wife out of the door.Kirsty passed them, heading for the ground floor, as they climbed the steep tartan stairs, Strike making liberal use of the banister to haul himself up. He’d hoped Lochnagar might be on the first floor, but he was disappointed. It lay, as the name might have suggested, right at the top of the B&B, and faced out of the rear of the building.The furniture inside was made of cheap pine. Kirsty had arranged towels in the shape of kissing swans on the maroon bedspread, which matched the patterned wallpaper of maroon and deep purple. Leads dangled from behind the wall-mounted TV. A plastic kettle sat in the corner on a low table, beside the Corby trouser press. Through the window Strike glimpsed the sea at last: a gleaming golden bar lying low between buildings, in the misty haze created by the net curtains.Donna crossed the room and took the only chair. Her hands were gripping her own upper arms so tightly that the flesh showed white.“You can sit down,” she told Strike and Robin.Having nowhere else to do it, both sat down on the end of the double bed, with its slippery maroon cover. Douthwaite remained at the door, back against it, arms folded, displaying the hourglass tattoo.“Diamond, Jacks, Douthwaite,” Donna recited. “How many other names have you had?”“None,” said Douthwaite, trying for a laugh, but failing.“Why’d you change your name from Douthwaite to Jacks?” she demanded. “Why were the police after you?”“They weren’t after me,” croaked Douthwaite. “This was ages ago. I wanted a fresh start, that’s all.”“How many fresh starts does one man need?” said Donna. “What did you do? Why’d you have to give a police statement?”“A doctor went missing,” said Douthwaite, with a glance at Strike.“What doctor? When?”“Her name was Margot Bamborough.”“Bamborough?” repeated Donna, her forehead bifurcated by that deep frown line, “But that… that was all over the news…”“They interviewed all the patients she’d seen before she disappeared,” Douthwaite said quickly. “It was routine! They didn’t have anything on me.”“You must think I was born bloody yesterday,” said Donna. “They,” she pointed at Strike and Robin, “haven’t tracked you down because it was routine inquiries, have they? You didn’t change your bloody name because it was routine inquiries! Screwing her, were you?”“No, I wasn’t bloody screwing her!” said Douthwaite, with his first sign of fight.“Mr. Douthwaite,” began Strike.“Diamond!” said Douthwaite, more in desperation than in anger.“I’d be grateful if you’d read through your police statement, see whether you’ve got anything to add.”Douthwaite looked as though he’d have liked to refuse, but after a slight hesitation he took the pieces of paper and began to read. The statement was a long one, covering as it did the suicide of Joanna Hammond, his married ex-lover, the beating he’d endured at the hands of her husband, the anxiety and depression which had led to so many visits to the St. John’s surgery, his assertion that he’d felt nothing more for Margot Bamborough than mild gratitude for her clinical expertise, his denial that he’d ever brought or sent her gifts and his feeble alibi for the time of her disappearance.“Yeah, I’ve got nothing to add to that,” Douthwaite said at last, holding the pieces of paper back out to Strike.“I want to read it,” said Donna at once.“It’s got nothing to do with—it’s forty years ago, it’s nothing,” said Douthwaite.“Your real name’s Douthwaite and I never knew till five minutes ago! I’ve got a right to know who you are,” she said fiercely, “I’ve got a right to know, so I can decide whether I was a bloody mug to stay with you, after the last—”“Fine, read it, go on,” said Douthwaite with unconvincing bravado, and Strike handed the statement over to Donna.She’d read for barely a minute when she burst out,“You were sleeping with a married—and she killed herself?”“I wasn’t—we weren’t—once, it happened, once! Nobody kills themselves over that!”“Why’d she do it, then? Why?”“Her husband was a bastard.”“My husband’s a bastard. I haven’t topped myself!”“Christ’s sake, Donna—”“What happened?”“It was nothing!” said Douthwaite. “We used to hang out together, few of the lads at work and their wives and whatever, and one night I was out with some other mates and ran into Joanna, who was with some girlfriends and… some cunt tipped off her husband we’d left the pub together and—”“And then this doctor disappeared and all, and the police came calling?”Donna got to her feet, Douthwaite’s crumpled statement quivering in her hand. Still sitting on the slippery maroon coverlet, Robin remembered the day she’d found Sarah Shadlock’s diamond earring in her bed, and thought she knew a little, a very little, of what Donna was experiencing.“I knew you were a bloody cheat and a liar, but three girlfriends dead? One’s a tragedy,” said Donna furiously, and Strike wondered whether they were about to hear a Wildean epigram, “but three? How bloody unlucky can one man get?”“I never had anything going on with that doctor!”“You’ll try it on with anyone!” shrieked Donna, and addressing Robin, she said, “Year before last, I catch him in a guest bedroom with one of my best friends—”“Christ’s sake, Donna!” whimpered Douthwaite.“—and six months ago—”“Donna—”“—I find out he’s been sneaking around with one of our regulars—and now—” said Donna, advancing on Douthwaite, his statements clutched in her fist. “You creepy bastard, what happened to all these women?”“I had nothing to do with any of them dying, fuck’s sake!” said Douthwaite, trying for an incredulous laugh and merely looking terrified. “Donna, come on—you think I’m some kind of murderer?”“You expect me to believe—”To Strike’s surprise, Robin suddenly jumped to her feet. Taking Donna by the shoulders, she guided her back into her chair.“Put your head down,” Robin was saying, “head down.”When Robin moved to untie Donna’s apron, which was tight around her waist, and Strike saw that Donna’s forehead, which was all he could see now she had sunk her face into her hands, was as white as the net curtain behind her.“Donna?” said Douthwaite feebly, but his wife whispered,“You stay away from me, you bastard.”“Breathe,” Robin was saying, crouching beside Donna’s chair. “Get her some water,” she told Strike, who got up and went into the tiny shower room, where a plastic beaker sat in a holder over the sink.Almost as pale as his wife, Douthwaite watched as Robin persuaded Donna to drink.“Stay there, now,” Robin told the landlady, one hand resting on her shoulder. “Don’t get up.”“Did he have something to do with them dying?” Donna whispered, looking sideways at Robin, her pupils enormous with shock.“That’s what we’re here to find out,” Robin murmured back.She turned and looked meaningfully at Strike, who silently agreed that the best thing he could do for the stricken Donna was to get information out of Douthwaite.“We’ve got a number of questions we’d like to ask you,” Strike told him. “Obviously you’re not obliged to answer them, but I’d put it to you that it would be in the best interests of everyone, yourself included, to cooperate.”“What questions?” said Douthwaite, still flat against the door. Then, in a torrent of words, he said, “I’ve never hurt anyone, never, I’m not a violent man. Donna will tell you, I’ve never laid a finger on her in anger, that’s not who I am.”But when Strike merely continued to look at him, Douthwaite said pleadingly,“Look, I’ve told you—with Joanna—it was a one-night stand. I was just a kid,” he said, and in an echo of Irene Hickson, he said, “You do those kinds of things when you’re young, don’t you?”“And when you’re old,” whispered Donna. “And all the bloody years in between…”“Where were you,” Strike asked Douthwaite, “when Joanna killed herself?”“In Brent,” said Douthwaite. “Miles away! And I had witnesses to prove it. We used to work in pairs, selling, each do one side of the street, and I was out with a bloke called Tadger,” and he tried to laugh again. Nobody smiled. “Tadger, you can imagine the grief he… well, he was with me all day…“Got back to the office late in the afternoon, and there was a group of lads in there, and they told us Hammond had just got the message his wife had topped herself…“Terrible,” said the pale and sweating Douthwaite, “but except for that one night together, I had nothing to do with it. But her old man—well, it was easier to blame me,” said Douthwaite, “wasn’t it, than think about his own bloody behavior?“I got home a couple of nights later and he was lying in wait. Ambush. He beat the shit out of me.”“Good!” said Donna, on a half-sob.“And your neighbor, Janice the nurse, looked after—”“Straight off with the neighbor, were you, Steve?” said Donna, with a hollow laugh. “Get the nurse to mop you up?”“It wasn’t like that!” said Douthwaite with surprising vehemence.“It’s his little trick,” the white-faced Donna told Robin, who was still kneeling by her chair. “Always got a sob story on the go. Fell for it myself. Heartbroken after the love of his life drowned… oh my God,” Donna whispered, slowly shaking her head. “And she was the third.” With a hysterical little laugh, she said, “As far as we know. Maybe there are others. Who knows?”“Christ’s sake, Donna!” said Douthwaite, yet again. Patches of underarm sweat were visible through his thin turquoise T-shirt: Strike could literally smell his fear. “Come on, you know me, you know I’d never hurt anyone!”“Janice says she advised you to see the doctor about your symp—”“She never told me to go to the doctor!” snapped Douthwaite, one eye on his wife. “I didn’t need telling, I went off my own bat because I was just getting worried about the… headaches and… mostly headaches. I felt really bad.”“You visited Margot six times in one two-week period,” said Strike.“I felt ill, stomach pains and what have you… I mean, it obviously affected me, Joanna dying, and then people talking about me…”“Oh, poor you, poor you,” murmured Donna. “Jesus effing Christ. You hate going to the doctor. Six times in two weeks?”“Donna, come on,” said Douthwaite imploringly, “I was feeling like shit! And then the bloody police come and make out like I was stalking her or something. It was all my health!”“Did you buy her—?” began Strike.“—chocolates? No!” said Douthwaite, who suddenly seemed very agitated. “If someone sent her chocolates, maybe you should find them. But it wasn’t me! I told the police I never bought her anything, it weren’t like that—”“Witnesses said you seemed distressed and possibly angry, the last time you left Dr. Bamborough’s surgery,” said Strike. “What happened during that last visit?”Douthwaite’s breath was coming fast now. Suddenly, almost aggressively, he looked directly into Strike’s eyes.Experienced in the body language of suspects who yearn for the release and relief of unburdening themselves, no matter the consequences, Strike suddenly knew that Douthwaite was teetering on the brink of a disclosure. He’d have given almost anything to spirit the man away now, to a quiet interrogation room, but exactly as he’d feared, the precious moment was snatched away by Donna.“Turned you down, did she? What did you think, Steve—a scrubby little failed salesman had a chance with a doctor?”“I wasn’t bloody looking for a chance!” said Douthwaite, rounding on his wife, “I was there for my health, I was in a state!”“He’s like a bloody tomcat,” Donna told Robin, “slinking around behind everyone’s backs. He’ll use anything to get his end away, anything. His girlfriend’s topped herself and he’s using it to chat up nurses and doctors—”“I wasn’t, I was ill!”“That last meeting—” Strike began again.“I don’t know what you’re on about, it was nothing,” Douthwaite said, now avoiding looking Strike in the face. “The doc was just telling me to take it easy.”“Like you ever needed telling that, you lazy bastard,” spat Donna.“Perhaps,” said Strike, “as you’re feeling unwell, Mrs. Diamond, I could speak to Steve somewhere sep—”“Oh no you don’t!” said Donna. “No way! I want—”She exploded into tears, shoulders sagging, face in her hands.“I’m going to hear it all now… last chance…”“Donna—” said Douthwaite plaintively.“Don’t,” she sobbed into her fingers. “Don’t you dare.”“Perhaps,” said Strike, hoping to return to the last visit with Margot in due course, “we could go over your alibi for the time Dr. Bamborough disappeared?”Donna was sobbing, tears and mucus flowing freely now. Robin grabbed a paper napkin off the tray beside the kettle and handed it to her.Cowed by his wife’s distress, Douthwaite allowed Strike to lead him back over his shaky alibi for the evening in question, sticking to the story that he’d been sitting unnoticed in a café, scanning the newspapers for flats to rent.“I wanted to clear out, get away from all the gossip about Joanna. I just wanted to get away.”“So the desire to move wasn’t triggered by anything that passed between you and Dr. Bamborough during your last visit?” Strike asked.“No,” said Douthwaite, still not looking at Strike. “How could it be?”“Given up on her?” Donna asked from behind the wet napkin with which she was blotting her eyes. “Knew he’d made a fool of himself. Same as with that young lassie from Leeds, eh, Steve?”“Donna, for fuck’s sake—”“He forgets,” Donna said to Robin, “he’s not that cocky little sod in his twenties any more. Deluded, b—baldy bastard,” she sobbed.“Donna—”“So you moved to Waltham Forest…” prompted Strike.“Yeah. Police. Press. It was a nightmare,” said Douthwaite. “I thought of ending it, to tell you the—”“Shame you didn’t,” said Donna savagely. “Save us all a lot of time and trouble.”As though he hadn’t heard this, and ignoring Douthwaite’s look of outrage, Strike asked,“What made you go to Clacton-on-Sea? Did you have family there?”“I haven’t got family, I grew up in care—”“Oh, someone pass him a bloody violin,” said Donna.“Well, it’s true, isn’t it?” said Douthwaite, displaying unvarnished anger for the first time. “And I’m allowed to tell the truth about my own bloody life, aren’t I? I just wanted to be a Redcoat, because I sing a bit and it looked like a fun way to earn a living—”“Fun,” muttered Donna, “oh yeah, as long as you’re having fun, Steve—”“—get away from people treating me like I’d killed someone—”“And whoops!” said Donna. “There’s another one gone, in the pool—”“You know bloody well I had nothing to do with Julie drowning!”“How could I know?” said Donna, “I wasn’t there! It was before we even met!”“I showed you the story in the paper!” said Douthwaite. “I showed you, Donna, come on!” He turned to Strike. “A bunch of us were drinking in our chalet. Me and some mates were playing poker. Julie was tired. She left before we finished our game, walked back to her chalet. She walked round the pool, slipped in the dark, knocked herself out and—”For the first time, Douthwaite showed real distress.“—she drowned. I won’t ever forget it. Never. I ran outside in me underpants next morning, when I heard the shouting. I saw her body when they were taking her out of the pool. You don’t forget something like that. She was a kid. Twenty-two or something. Her parents came and… it was a horrible thing. Horrible. I never… that someone can go like that. A slip and a trip…“Yeah, so… that’s when I applied for a job at the Ingoldmells Butlin’s up the road from here. And that’s where I met Donna,” he said, with an apprehensive glance at his wife.“So you leaving Clacton-on-Sea and changing your name again had nothing to do with a man called Oakden coming to question you about Margot Bamborough?” asked Strike.Donna’s head jerked up.“Oh my God,” she said, “so even the Julie bit’s a lie?”“It’s not a lie!” said Douthwaite loudly. “I told you Julie and I had an argument a couple of days before she died, I told you that, because I felt so guilty after! This man, this—what did you say his name was? Oakden?—yeah, he turned up, saying he was writing a book about Dr. Bamborough disappearing. Went round all the other Redcoats talking to them about me, telling them all I’d been a suspect and how I’d changed my name afterward, making me sound dodgy as hell. And Julie was really pissed off with me because I hadn’t told her—”“Well, you really learned that lesson, didn’t you, Steve?” said Donna. “Run and hide, that’s all you know, and when you’re found out, you just sneak off and find some other woman to whine to, until she finds you out, and then—”“Mr. Douthwaite,” said Strike, cutting across Donna, “I want to thank you for your time. I know it’s been a shock, having all this raked up again.”Robin looked up at Strike, astonished. He couldn’t be leaving the interview here, surely? The Douthwaites (or Diamonds, as they thought of themselves), looked similarly taken aback. Strike extracted a second card from his pocket and held it out to Douthwaite.“If you remember anything,” the detective said, “you know where to find me. It’s never too late.”The hourglass tattoo on Douthwaite’s forearm rippled as he held out his hand for the card.“Who else’ve you talked to?” Douthwaite asked Strike.Now that his ordeal was over, he seemed curiously averse to it ending. Perhaps, thought Robin, he feared being alone with his wife.“Margot’s husband and family,” said Strike, watching Douthwaite’s reactions. “The co-workers who’re still alive—Dr. Gupta. One of the receptionists, Irene Hickson. Janice Beattie, the nur—”“That’s nice,” piped up Donna, “the nurse is still available, Steve—”“—an ex-boyfriend of Margot’s, her best friend, and a few other people.”Douthwaite, who’d flushed at his wife’s interjection, said,“Not Dennis Creed?”“Not yet,” said Strike. “Well,” he looked from husband to wife, “thanks for your time. We appreciate it.”Robin got to her feet.“I’m sorry,” she said quietly to Donna. “I hope you feel better.”“Thanks,” mumbled Donna.As Strike and Robin reached the top of the stairs, they heard shouting break out again behind the door of Lochnagar.“Donna, babes—”“Don’t you dare call me babes, you fucking bastard!”“No point carrying on,” said Strike quietly, setting off down the steep tartaned stairs as slowly as the obese old lady had moved. “He’s not going to say it with her there.”“Say what?”“Well, that,” said Strike, as the Douthwaites’ shouts echoed down the stairs, “is the question, isn’t it?”
