---

author: ["Robert Galbraith"]
title: "Troubled Blood - index_split_073.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Robert Galbraith - Troubled Blood"
tags: ["said", "strike", "betty", "robin", "fuller", "e", "asked", "thought", "know", "al", "door", "like", "back", "got", "bamborough", "er", "brenner", "still", "one", "wheezed", "say", "right", "think", "eye", "yeah"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI DUO]
url: /posts/robertgalbraith/TroubledBlood-indexsplit073html

---


Troubled Blood
56Whereas this Lady, like a sheepe astray,Now drowned in the depth of sleepe all fearlesse lay.Edmund SpenserThe Faerie QueeneAt the precise moment Matthew turned to walk away from Robin in Holborn, Strike, who was sitting in his parked car three miles away, outside the familiar terraced house in Stoke Newington, decided to call his brother, lest Al sit in wait for him at the office all day. The detective’s anger was shot through with other, less easily identifiable feelings, of which the least painful to acknowledge was grudging admiration for Al’s persistence. Strike didn’t doubt that Al had come to the office for a last-ditch attempt to persuade Strike into some form of reconciliation with his father, preferably before or during the party to celebrate his father’s new album. Having always considered Al a fairly weak and sybaritic character, Strike had to admit he was showing guts, risking his older brother’s fury.Strike waited until Elinor Dean had unloaded the foam and the cheap wood from her car and carried it all inside with the aid of her friend from Shifty’s gym, watched the front door close, then called Al’s number.“Hi,” said Al, picking up after a single ring.“Why are you in my office?” asked Strike.“Wanted to see you, bruv. Talk face to face.”“Well, I won’t be back there today,” lied Strike. “So I suggest you say whatever it is you’ve got to say now.”“Bruv—”“Who’s there with you?”“Er—your secretary—Pat, is it?” Strike heard Al turn away from his mobile to check, and heard Pat’s caw of agreement, “and a bloke called—”“Barclay,” said the Scot loudly, in the background.“Right, well, go into my office for some privacy,” said Strike. He listened while Al told Pat what Strike had asked him to do, heard the familiar sound of his own office door closing, then said,“If this is about what I think it’s about—”“Cormoran, we didn’t want to tell you this, but Dad’s got cancer.”Oh, for fuck’s sake.Strike leaned forwards momentarily and rested his forehead on the steering wheel of his car, before he sat up again.“Prostate,” Al continued. “They reckon they’ve caught it early. But we thought you should know, because this party isn’t just about celebrating the band’s anniversary, and the new album. It’s about giving him something to look forward to.”There was a silence.“We thought you should know,” Al repeated.Why should I fucking know? thought Strike, eyes on the closed door of Elinor Dean’s house. He had no relationship with Rokeby. Did Al expect him to weep, to rush to Rokeby’s side, to express compassion or pity? Rokeby was a multimillionaire. Doubtless he’d enjoy the very best treatment. The memory of Joan’s lily urn bobbing away on the sea recurred as Strike said,“OK, well, I don’t really know how to respond to that. I’m sure it’s a bugger for everyone who cares about him.”Another long silence followed.“We thought this might make a difference,” said Al quietly.“To what?”“To your attitude.”“As long as they’ve caught it early, he’ll be fine,” said Strike bracingly. “Probably live to father another couple of kids he never sees.”“Jesus Christ!” said Al, really angry now. “You might not give a shit, but he happens to be my dad—”“I give a shit about people who’ve ever given a shit about me,” said Strike, “and keep your fucking voice down, those are my employees you’re airing my private business in front of.”“That’s your priority?”Strike thought of Charlotte who, according to the papers, remained in hospital, and of Lucy, who was agitating to know whether Strike would be able to take the weekend off, to join Ted at her house in Bromley for the weekend. He thought of the clients in the Shifty case, who were hinting they’d terminate payment in a week’s time unless the agency found out what hold Shifty had on his boss. He thought of Margot Bamborough, and the rapidly vanishing year they’d been allotted to find out what had happened to her. Inexplicably, he thought of Robin, and the fact that he’d forgotten that today was her mediation session with Matthew.“I’ve got a life,” said Strike, keeping a curb on his temper only by exercising maximum self-control, “which is hard and complicated, just like everyone else’s. Rokeby’s got a wife and half a dozen kids and I’m at maximum capacity for people who need me. I’m not coming to his fucking party, I’m not interested in hearing from him, I don’t want a relationship with him. I don’t know how much clearer I can make this, Al, but I’m—”The line went dead. Without regretting anything he’d said, but nevertheless breathing heavily, Strike threw his mobile onto the passenger seat, lit a cigarette and watched Elinor Dean’s front door for another fifteen minutes until, on a sudden whim, he snatched up the phone from beside him again, and called Barclay.“What are you doing right now?”“Filin’ my expenses,” said the Scot laconically. “That casino cost ye a fortune.”“Is my brother still there?”“No, he left.”“Good. I need you to come and take over in Stoke Newington.”“I havenae got my car wi’ me.”“OK, well, fuck it, then,” said Strike angrily.“I’m sorry, Strike,” said Barclay, “but I’m s’posed tae have this afternoon off—”“No, I’m sorry,” said Strike, closing his eyes. He had the same sensation of a wire tightening around his forehead that he’d experienced in St. Mawes. “Getting frustrated. Enjoy your afternoon off. Seriously,” he added, in case Barclay thought he was being sarcastic.Having hung up on Barclay, Strike rang Robin.“How did mediation go?”“Fine,” said Robin, though she sounded strangely flat. “We’ve settled.”“Great!”“Yeah. It’s a relief.”“Did you say you’re going to Betty Fuller’s?”“Yes, I was just about to head into the Tube.”“Remind me where she lives?”“Sheltered housing on Sans Walk in Clerkenwell.”“OK, I’ll meet you there,” said Strike.“Really? I’m fine to—”“I know, but I want to be there,” Strike cut across her.He pulled away from Elinor Dean’s house knowing that he’d just been abrasive toward his two favorite colleagues. If he was going to vent his temper, it could at least have been at Pat and Morris’s expense.Twenty minutes later, Strike entered Clerkenwell via Percival Street. To his right were the nondescript red-brick flats where Janice Beattie and Steve Douthwaite had once lived, and he wondered yet again what had become of Margot’s one-time patient, whose whereabouts, in spite of his and Robin’s best efforts, remained unknown.Sans Walk was a narrow pedestrianized one-way street. Strike parked his BMW as close to it as possible. The day was surprisingly warm, in spite of a good amount of cloud. As he approached Sans Walk, he saw Robin waiting for him at the entrance.“Hi,” she said. “It’s up the other end, that red-brick modern building with the circular tower thing on top.”“Great,” said Strike, as they set off together. “Sorry for earlier, I—”“No, it’s fine,” said Robin, “I know we really need results soon.”But Strike thought he detected a slight coolness.“Al pissed me off,” he explained. “So I might’ve been a bit—”“Cormoran, it’s fine,” repeated Robin, but with a smile that reassured Strike.“Great news about the mediation,” he said.“Yes,” said Robin, though she didn’t look particularly pleased. “So, what d’you think’s the best tack to take with Betty Fuller?”“Be honest and direct about who we are and what we’re investigating,” said Strike, “and then play it by ear, I think. And hope to Christ she’s not demented…”Priory House was a modern, multi-level building with a shared garden at the back. As they approached the front doors, a middle-aged couple came out; they had the relieved look of people who’d just done their duty, and, smiling at Strike and Robin, they held open the door to let them walk inside.“Thanks very much,” said Robin, smiling at them, and as the couple walked on, she heard the woman say,“At least she remembered who we are, this time…”Had it not been for the mobility scooters, the place would have resembled a hall of residence, with its hardy dark gray carpet underfoot, its bulletin board bristling with pamphlets and a depressing smell of communal cooking hanging in the air.“She’s on the ground floor,” said Robin, pointing toward a corridor. “I checked the names on the buzzer.”They passed a number of identical pine doors until they reached the one with “Elizabeth Fuller” printed on a card in a metal holder. Through the wood came the muffled sounds of voices. Just as it had been when he’d visited Janice Beattie, the TV was turned up very high inside. Strike rapped hard on the door.After a lengthy wait, the door opened very slowly to reveal a panting old lady wearing a nasal cannula, who’d pulled her oxygen tank to the door with her. Over her shoulder, Strike saw a TV blaring the reality show The Only Way is Essex.“I’m fine. You just upset me, Arg,” a heavily made-up girl in bright blue was saying onscreen.Betty Fuller looked as though she’d been subject to heavier gravity than the rest of humankind. Everything about her had sagged and drooped: the corners of her lipless mouth, her papery eyelids, her loose jowls, the tip of her thin nose. It appeared that the flesh had been sucked down out of her upper body into her lower: Betty had almost no bust, but her hips were broad and her poor bare legs were immensely swollen, both ankles thicker than her neck. She wore what looked like a pair of men’s slippers and a dark green knitted dress on which there were several stains. A yellowish scalp was clearly visible through the sparse gray hair slicked back off her face and a hearing aid was prominent in her left ear.“Who’re you?” she wheezed, looking from Robin to Strike.“Afternoon, Mrs. Fuller,” said Strike loudly and clearly, “my name’s Cormoran Strike and this is Robin Ellacott.”He pulled his driver’s license out of his pocket and showed it to her, with his card. She made an impatient gesture, to show she couldn’t read them; her eyes were milky with glaucoma.“We’re private detectives,” said Strike, voice still raised over the arguing pair on-screen (“At the end of the day, Lucy, she slept, on a one-night stand, wiv a boy—” “Arg—Arg—Arg—this is irrelevant—”).“We’ve been hired to try and find out what happened to Margot Bamborough. She was a doctor who—”“’Oo?”“Dr. Margot Bamborough,” Strike repeated, still more loudly. “She went missing from Clerkenwell in 1974. We heard you—”“Oh yeah…” said Betty Fuller, who appeared to need to draw breath every few words. “Dr. Bamborough… yeah.”“Well, we wondered whether we could talk to you about her?”Betty Fuller stood there for what seemed a very long twenty seconds, thinking this over, while onscreen a young man in a maroon suit said to the over-made-up girl, “I didn’t wanna bring it up but you come over to me—”Betty Fuller made an impatient gesture, turned and shuffled back inside. Strike and Robin glanced at each other.“Is it all right to come in, Mrs. Fuller?” asked Strike loudly.She nodded. Having carefully positioned her oxygen tank, she fell back into her armchair, then tugged the knitted dress in an effort to make it cover her knees. Strike and Robin entered the room and Strike closed the door. Watching the old lady struggle to pull her dress down, Robin had an urge to take a blanket off the unmade bed, and place it decorously over her lap.Robin had discovered during her research that Betty was eighty-four. The old lady’s physical state shocked her. The small room smelled of BO and urine. A door showed a small toilet leading off the single bedroom. Through the open wardrobe door, Robin saw crumpled clothes which had been thrown there, and two empty wine bottles, half hidden in underwear. There was nothing on the walls except a cat calendar: the month of May showed a pair of ginger kittens peeking out from between pink geranium blossoms.“Would it be all right to turn this down?” Strike shouted over the TV, where the couple onscreen continued to argue, the woman’s eyelashes as thick as wooly bear caterpillars.“Turn it… off,” said Betty Fuller. “’S a recording.”The Essex voices were suddenly extinguished. The two detectives looked around. There were only two choices for seats: the unmade bed and a hard, upright chair, so Robin took the former, Strike the latter. Removing his notebook from his pocket, Strike said,“We’ve been hired by Dr. Bamborough’s daughter, Mrs. Fuller, to try and find out what happened to her.”Betty Fuller made a noise like “hurhm,” which sounded disparaging, although Strike thought it might also have been an attempt to clear phlegm out of her throat. She rocked slightly to one side in her chair and pulled ineffectually at the back of her dress. Her swollen lower legs were knotted with varicose veins.“So, you remember Dr. Bamborough disappearing, do you, Mrs. Fuller?”“…’es,” she grunted, still breathing heavily. In spite of her incapacity and unpromising manner, Strike had the impression of somebody both more alert than they might appear at first glance, and happier to have company and attention than the unprepossessing exterior might suggest.“You were living in Skinner Street then, weren’t you?”She coughed, which seemed to clear her lungs, and in a slightly steadier voice, she said,“Was there till… last year. Michael Cliffe…’Ouse. Top floor. Couldn’t manage, no more.”Strike glanced at Robin; he’d expected her to lead the interrogation, assumed Betty would respond better to a woman, but Robin seemed oddly passive, sitting on the bed, her gaze wandering over the small room.“Were you one of Dr. Bamborough’s patients?” Strike asked Betty.“Yeah,” wheezed Betty. “I was.”Robin was thinking, is this where single people end up, people without children to look out for them, without double incomes? In small boxes, living vicariously through reality stars?Next Christmas, no doubt, she’d run into Matthew, Sarah and their new baby in Masham. She could just imagine Sarah’s proud strut through the streets, pushing a top-of-the-range pushchair, Matthew beside her, and a baby with Sarah’s white-blonde hair peeking over the top of the blankets. Now, when Jenny and Stephen ran into them, there’d be common ground, the shared language of parenthood. Robin decided there and then, sitting on Betty Fuller’s bed, to make sure she didn’t go home next Christmas. She’d offer to work through it, if necessary.“Did you like Dr. Bamborough?” Strike was asking Betty.“She were… all right,” said Betty.“Did you ever meet any of the other doctors at the practice?” asked Strike.Betty Fuller’s chest rose and fell with her labored breathing. Though it was hard to tell with the nasal cannula in the way, Strike thought he saw a thin smile.“Yeah,” she said.“Which ones?”“Brenner,” she said hoarsely, and coughed again. “Needed an ’ouse call…’mergency… she weren’t available.”“So Dr. Brenner came out to see you?”“Hurhm,” said Betty Fuller. “Yeah.”There were a few small, cheaply framed photographs on the windowsill, Robin noticed. Two of them showed a fat tabby cat, presumably a lamented pet, but there were also a couple showing toddlers, and one of two big-haired teenaged girls, wearing puff-sleeved dresses from the eighties. So you could end up alone, in near squalor, even if you had children? Was it solely money, then, that made the difference? She thought of the ten thousand pounds she’d be receiving into her bank account later that week, which would be reduced immediately by legal bills and council tax. She’d need to be careful not to fritter it away. She really needed to start saving, to start paying into a pension.“You must have been seriously unwell, were you?” Strike was asking Betty. “To need a house call?”He had no particular reason for asking, except to establish a friendly conversational atmosphere. In his experience of old ladies, there was little they enjoyed more than discussing their health.Betty Fuller suddenly grinned at him, showing chipped yellow teeth.“You ever taken it… up the shitter… with a nine-inch cock?”Only by exercising the utmost restraint did Robin prevent herself letting out a shocked laugh. She had to hand it to Strike: he didn’t so much as grin as he said,“Can’t say I have.”“Well,” wheezed Betty Fuller, “you can… take it from me… fuckin’… agony… geezer went at me… like a fucking power drill… split my arsehole open.”She gasped for air, half-laughing.“My Cindy ’ears me moanin’… blood… says ‘Mum, you gotta… get that seen to…’ called… doctor.”“Cindy’s your—”“Daughter,” said Betty Fuller. “Yeah… got two. Cindy and Cathy…”“And Dr. Brenner came out to see you, did he?” asked Strike, trying not to dwell on the mental image Betty had conjured.“Yeah… takes a look… sends me to A&E, yeah… nineteen stitches,” said Betty Fuller. “And I sat on… an ice pack… for a week… and no fuckin’ money… comin’ in… After that,” she panted, “no anal… unless they was… payin’ double and nuthin’ over… six inches… neither.”She let out a cackle of laughter, which ended in coughs. Strike and Robin were carefully avoiding looking at each other.“Was that the only time you met Dr. Brenner?” asked Strike, when the coughing had subsided.“No,” croaked Betty Fuller, thumping her chest. “I seen ’im regular… ev’ry Friday night… for monfs… after.”She didn’t seem to feel any qualms about telling Strike this. On the contrary, Strike thought she seemed to be enjoying herself.“When did that arrangement start?” asked Strike.“Couple o’ weeks… after ’e seen me… for me arse,” said Betty Fuller. “Knocked on me door… wiv ’is doctor’s bag… pretendin’ ’e’d… come to check… then ’e says… wants a regular ’pointment. Friday night…’alf past six… tell the neighbors… medical… if they ask…”Betty paused to cough noisily. When she’d quelled her rattling chest, she went on,“… and if I told anyone…’e’d go to the cops… say I was… extorting ’im…”“Threatened you, did he?”“Yeah,” panted Betty Fuller, though without rancor, “but ’e wasn’t… try’na get it… free… so I kep’… me mouf shut.”“You never told Dr. Bamborough what was going on?” asked Robin.Betty looked sideways at Robin who, in Strike’s view, had rarely looked as out of place as she did sitting on Betty’s bed: young, clean and healthy, and perhaps Betty’s drooping, occluded eyes saw his partner the same way, because she seemed to resent both question and questioner.“’Course I fuckin’… didn’t. She tried ta get me to… stop working… Brenner… easiest job of the week.”“Why was that?” asked Strike.Betty laughed wheezily again.“’E liked me… lyin’ still, like I was… coma… playin’ dead. ’E fucked me… sayin’ ’is dirty words… I pretended… couldn’t ’ear… except once,” said Betty, with a half-chuckle, half-cough, “the bleedin’ fire alarm… went off ’alfway… I said… in ’is ear… ‘I’m not stayin’ dead… if we’re on fuckin’ fire… I’ve got kids… next room…’ ’E was livid… turned out it was… false alarm…”She cackled, then coughed again.“D’you think Dr. Bamborough suspected Dr. Brenner of visiting you?” asked Robin.“No,” said Betty, testily, with another sideways glance. “’Course she fuckin’ didn’t… was eivver of us gonna tell ’er?”“Was Brenner with you,” asked Strike, “the night she went missing?”“Yeah,” said Betty Fuller indifferently.“He arrived and left at the usual times?”“Yeah,” said Betty again.“Did he keep visiting you, after Dr. Bamborough disappeared?”“No,” said Betty. “Police… all over the surgery… no, ’e stopped comin’… I ’eard…’e retired, not long after… Dead now, I s’pose?”“Yes,” said Strike, “he is.”The ruined face bore witness to past violence. Strike, whose own nose had been broken, was sure Betty’s hadn’t originally been the shape it was now, with its crooked tip.“Was Brenner ever violent to you?”“Never.”“While your—arrangement was going on,” said Strike, “did you ever mention it to anyone?”“Nope,” said Betty.“What about after Brenner retired?” asked Strike. “Did you happen to tell a man called Tudor Athorn?”“Clever, aincha?” said Betty, with a cackle of mild surprise. “Yeah, I told Tudor…’e’s long gawn, ’s well… used to drink… wiv Tudor. ’Is nephew’s… still round ’ere… grown up… I seen ’im… about. Retarded,” said Betty Fuller.“In your opinion,” said Strike, “given what you know about Brenner, d’you think he’d have taken advantage of a patient?”There was a pause. Betty’s milky eyes surveyed Strike.“On’y… if she was out cold.”“Not otherwise?” said Strike.Taking a deep breath of oxygen through her crooked nose, Betty said,“Man like that… when there’s one fing… what really… gets ’im off… that’s all ’e wants…”“Did he ever want to drug you?” asked Strike.“No,” said Betty, “didn’t need to…”“D’you remember,” asked Strike, turning a page in his notebook, “a social worker called Wilma Bayliss?”“Colored girl?” said Betty. “Yeah… you smoke, dontcha?” she added. “Can smell it… give us one,” she said, and out of the wrecked old body came a whiff of flirtatiousness.“I don’t think that’s a good idea,” said Strike, smiling. “Seeing as you’re on oxygen.”“Oh fuck off, then,” said Betty.“Did you like Wilma?”“’Oo?”“Wilma Bayliss, your social worker.”“She were… like they all are,” said Betty, with a shrug.“We spoke to Mrs. Bayliss’s daughters recently,” said Strike. “They were telling us about the threatening notes that were sent to Dr. Bamborough, before she disappeared.”Betty breathed in and out, her collapsed chest doing its valiant best for her, and a small squeak issued from her ruined lungs.“Do you know anything about those notes?”“No,” said Betty. “I ’eard… they’d bin sent. Everyone ’eard, round ’ere.”“Who did they hear it from?”“Probably that Irene Bull…”“You remember Irene, do you?”With many more pauses to catch her breath, Betty Fuller explained that her youngest sister had been in the same year as Irene at school. Irene’s family had lived in a road off Skinner Street: Corporation Row.“Thought…’er shit… smelled of roses… that one,” said Betty. She laughed, but then broke yet again into a volley of hoarse coughs. When she’d recovered, she said, “The police… asked ’em all… not to talk… but the mouth on… that girl… everyone knew… there’d been threats made.”“According to Wilma’s daughters,” said Strike, watching for Betty’s reaction, “you knew who sent those notes.”“No, I never,” said Betty Fuller, no longer smiling.“You were sure Marcus Bayliss hadn’t sent them, though?”“Marcus never…’e was a lovely… y’know, I always liked… a darkie, me,” said Betty Fuller, and Robin, hoping Betty hadn’t seen her wince, looked down at her hands. “Very ’andsome… I’d’ve given it…’im for free… hahaha… big, tall man,” said Betty wistfully, “… kind man… no, ’e never freatened no doctor.”“So who d’you think—”“My second girl… my Cathy…” continued Betty, “determinedly deaf, ’er dad was a darkie… dunno ’oo ’e was… condom split… I kept ’er ’cause… I like kids, but… she don’t give a shit… about me. Smackhead!” said Betty fiercely. “I never touched it… seen too many… go that way… stole from me… I told ’er… keep the fuck… my ’ouse…”“Cindy’s good,” gasped Betty. She was fighting her breathlessness now, though still relishing Strike’s captive attention. “Cindy… drops by. Earning… decent money…”“Really?” said Strike, playing along, waiting for his opportunity. “What does Cindy do?”“Escort,” wheezed Betty. “Lovely figure… up West… makin’ more’n I ever… Arabs an’ whatnot… but she says…‘Ma, you wouldn’t… like it these days… all they want… is anal.’” Betty cackled, coughed and then, without warning, turned her head to look at Robin perched on the bed and said with vitriol: “She don’t find it… funny, this one… do you?” she demanded of Robin, who was taken aback. “’S’pect… you give it away… for meals an’ jewelry… an’ fink it’s… fink it’s free… look at ’er face,” wheezed Betty, eyeing Robin with dislike, “you’re the same as…? the sniffy fuckin’… social worker… we ’ad round… when I… minding Cathy’s kids… gorn now,” said Betty, angrily. “Took into care…“‘New, Mrs. Fuller,’” said Betty, adopting a grotesquely genteel accent, “‘new, it meks… new diff’rence to me…’ow yew ladies mek… ends meet… sex work is
work’… they’ll tell yer that… patronisin’… fuckin’… but would they… want their daughters… doin’ it? Would they fuck,” said Betty Fuller, and she paid for her longest speech yet with her most severe spate of coughing.“Cindy does… too much coke,” Betty wheezed, her eyes watering, when she could talk again. “… keeps the weight off… Cathy, it was smack… boyfriend… workin’ for ’im… beat ’er blue… pregnant and lost it…”“I’m sorry to hear that,” said Strike.“It’s all kids… on the street… these days,” said Betty, and a glimmer of what Strike thought was real distress showed through the determinedly tough exterior. “Firteen, fourteen… children… my day… we’d’ve marched ’em… right back ’ome… it’s all right, grown women, but kids—whatchew fucking starin’ at?” she barked to Robin.“Cormoran, I might—” said Robin, standing up and gesturing toward the door.“Yeah, off you fuck,” said Betty Fuller, watching with satisfaction as Robin left her room. “You doin’ ’er, are you?” she wheezed at Strike, once the door had clicked shut behind Robin.“No,” he said.“What the fuck’s… point, then?”“She’s very good at the job,” said Strike. “When she’s not up against someone like you, that is,” and Betty Fuller grinned, displaying her Cheddar-yellow teeth.“Hahaha… I know…’er type… knows fuckin’ nothing… ’bout real life…”“There was a man living in Leather Lane, back in Margot Bamborough’s day,” said Strike. “Name of Niccolo Ricci? ‘Mucky,’ they used to call him.”Betty Fuller said nothing, but the milky eyes narrowed.“What d’you know about Ricci?” asked Strike.“Same as… ev’ryone,” said Betty.Out of the corner of his eye, Strike saw Robin emerge into the daylight. She lifted her hair briefly off her neck, as though needing to remove weight from herself, then walked out of sight with her hands in her jacket pockets.“It warn’t Mucky… what freatened ’er,” said Betty. “’E wouldn’t… write notes. Not ’is… style.”“Ricci turned up at the St. John’s practice Christmas party,” said Strike. “Which seemed odd.”“Don’t know… nuffin’ ’bout that…”“Some of the people at the party assumed he was Gloria Conti’s father.”“Never ’eard of ’er,” wheezed Betty.“According to Wilma Bayliss’s daughters,” said Strike, “you told their mother you were scared of the person who wrote the notes. You said the writer of the notes killed Margot Bamborough. You told Wilma he’d kill you, too, if you said who he was.”Betty’s milky eyes were expressionless. Her thin chest labored to get enough oxygen into her lungs. Strike had just concluded that she definitely wasn’t going to talk, when she opened her mouth.“Local girl I knew,” she said, “friend o’ mine… she met Mucky… ’e come cruisin’… our corner…’e says to Jen…‘You’re better’n this… workin’ the street… body like yours… I could get you… five times what… you’re earnin’ ’ere…’ so off Jen goes,” said Betty, “up West… Soho… strippin’ for punters… sex wiv ’is mates…”“I met ’er… coupla years later… visitin’ ’er mum… and she tole me a story.“Girl at their club… gorgeous girl, Jen said… got raped… knifepoint. Cut…” said Betty Fuller, indicating her own sagging torso, “right down the ribs… by a mate… of Ricci’s…“Some people,” said the old woman, “fink a hooker… being raped… it just means she never… got paid…’spect your Miss Stick-Up-’Er-Arse,” said Betty, glancing at the window, “finks that… but it ain’t that…“This girl… angry… wants revenge… get back… at Ricci… so the silly bitch… turns police informer…“And Mucky found out,” wheezed Betty Fuller, “and ’e filmed it… as they killed ’er. My mate Jen was told… by someone… what ’ad seen… the film… Ricci kept it… in the safe… show people… if they needed… scaring…“Jen’s dead now,” said Betty Fuller. “Overdosed… firty-odd years ago… fort she’d be better… up West… and ’ere’s me… workin’ the streets… still alive.“I ain’t got nuffing… to say… about no notes… it warn’t Marcus… that’s all… That’s my meals on wheels,” said Betty, her head turning, and Strike saw a man heading toward the outside door, with a pile of foil trays in his arms.“I’m done,” Betty said, who seemed suddenly tired and cross. “You can turn… telly back on… and move… that table over… pass me that knife and fork… in the loo…”She’d rinsed them off in the bathroom sink, but they were still dirty. Strike washed them again before taking them to her. After arranging the table in front of her armchair, and turning The Only Way is Essex back on, he opened the door to the meals-on-wheels man, who was gray-haired and cheery.“Oh hello,” said the newcomer in a loud voice. “This your son, Betty?”“Is he fuck,” wheezed Betty Fuller. “Whatchew got?”“Chicken casserole and jelly and custard, love…”“Thanks very much for talking to me, Mrs. Fuller,” said Strike, but Betty’s stock of goodwill had plainly been exhausted, and she was now far more interested in her food.Robin was leaning against a nearby wall, reading something off her phone, when Strike emerged from the building.“I thought it was best to clear out,” she said, in a flat voice. “How did it go?”“She won’t talk about the notes,” said Strike, as the pair of them headed back down Sans Walk, “and if you ask me why, I’d say it’s because she thinks Mucky Ricci wrote them. I’ve found out a bit more about that girl in the snuff movie.”“You’re joking?” said Robin, looking worried.“Apparently she was a police informer in one of Ricci’s—”Robin gasped.“Kara Wolfson!”“What?”“Kara Wolfson. One of the women they thought Creed might have killed. Kara worked at a nightclub in Soho—the owners put it about after she disappeared that she’d been a police informer!”“How did you know that?” asked Strike, taken aback. He couldn’t remember this information from The Demon of Paradise Park.Robin suddenly remembered that she’d heard this from Brian Tucker, back at the Star Café. She hadn’t yet heard back from the Ministry of Justice about the possibility of interviewing Creed, and as Strike still had no inkling what she was up to, she said,“Think I read it online…”But with a new heaviness pressing on her heart, Robin remembered that Kara’s only remaining close relative, the brother she’d raised, had drunk himself to death. Hutchins had said the police weren’t able to do anything about that film. Kara Wolfson’s body might be anywhere. Some stories didn’t have neat endings: there was nowhere to lay flowers for Kara Wolfson, unless it was on the corner near the strip joint where she’d last been seen.Fighting the depression now threatening to overwhelm her, Robin raised her phone to show Strike what she’d been looking up, and said in a determinedly matter-of-fact voice,“I was just reading about somnophilia, otherwise known as sleeping princess syndrome.”“Which, I take it—”“Was Brenner’s kink,” said Robin, and reading off her phone, she said, “‘Somnophilia is a paraphilia in which the individual is sexually aroused by someone non-responsive… some psychologists have linked somnophilia with necrophilia.’ Cormoran… you know how he had barbiturates stocked up in his office?”“Yeah,” said Strike slowly, as they walked back toward his car. “Well, this is going to give us something to talk to Dorothy’s son about, isn’t it? I wonder whether she was game for playing dead? Or whether she found herself sleeping a long time, after Brenner had been round for lunch?”Robin gave a small shudder.“I know,” Strike continued, as he lit up, “I said he’d be a last resort, but we’ve only got three months left. I’m starting to think I’m going to have to pay Mucky Ricci a visit.”
