# How to get this running locally on Windows 11.

[!](screenshot.png)

### Rename all occurences of 'indexname' to the name you want the index to have on ElasticSearch

Files to change: 

- static\js\server.js
- pythonscripts\index-with-elastic-search.py

Replace all occurences of
F:\HugoBookSearchElasticGithubGithub
With the correct path  you've cloned this git to.
files to change:

- pythonscripts/index-with-elastic-search.py
- 00startall.py

Replace all occurences of 'yourelasticpassword'
(See below for how to set a password)
Files to change:

- pythonscripts\index-with-elastic-search.py
- static\js\server.js



# Run everything 

Use yarn (or npm) to install everything listed in package.json

> yarn install

## Start servers.

This is not the best way to do it, but my Python is better than my package.json scripts and this works well enough. 

Change filepaths to the correct locations in 
- 00startall.py
And run it, 3 command line windows will open, 1 will run ElasticSearch, 1 will run the NodeJS server that connects the site to ElasticSearch and returns results, and 1 will run the hugo server.


## Add posts
Add markdown files in /content or subfolders of /content.  

## RUN THE INDEX SCRIPT AFTER YOU ADD FILES
(this should be automated at some point)
Set the value of clear_index to True or False depending on if you want to clear the ElasticSearch Index and add everything again (useful if you messed something up) or if you only want to add new files

> python -m pip install markdown python-frontmatter
> python index-with-elastic-search.py


# ## Live site
Go to localhost:1313/ and you should see Hugo, Search should also work for exact matches, wildcards and consecutive words


---- 

## Build the site manually
> hugo
or 
> hugo --gc --minify

# Start Hugo server manually
> hugo server

# Start NodeJS server manually
> cd static\js
> node server.js 

# Test if node is returning results

http://localhost:3000/search?q=randomwordtotestsearch

This should show JSON in your browser.

# Start ElasticSearch manually 
"C:\elasticsearch-8.14.3\bin\elasticsearch.bat"
"C:\elasticsearch-8.14.3\config" --  xpack.security.http.ssl.enabled: false

## Empty elasticsearch index [indexname]
curl -u elastic:yourelasticpassword -X DELETE "http://localhost:9200/indexname"

# Test if Elasticsearch is returning results


curl -X GET "localhost:9200/indexname/_search?pretty" -H "Content-Type: application/json" -u elastic:yourelasticpassword -d "{\"query\": {\"multi_match\": {\"query\": \"randomwordtotestsearch \", \"fields\": [\"title\", \"author\", \"content\"]}}}"

--- 

# Set or reset ElasticSearch password. USER is 'elastic'!
> cd C:\elasticsearch-8.14.3\bin
> $ elasticsearch-reset-password -u elastic

This tool will reset the password of the [elastic] user to an autogenerated value.
The password will be printed in the console.

Password for the [elastic] user successfully reset.
New value: *yourelasticpassword*