---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_075.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["sean", "michelle", "viggie", "know", "cia", "said", "thing", "think", "could", "monk", "horatio", "get", "go", "come", "across", "river", "want", "around", "room", "hayes", "whitfield", "found", "little", "looked", "camp"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit075html

---


Unknown
Chapter 75Two hours later Babbage Town was empty except for a few guards. Michelle and Sean had continued to walk around the grounds looking for any clue to Viggie’s disappearance, while Horatio had gone to his room to get his things together.While they were at Alicia’s cottage packing to leave, Merkle Hayes called Sean with news that was hardly surprising. “It’s like the girl’s vanished from the face of the earth.” Then Hayes made a comment that caused Sean to nearly drop his phone. “Even the CIA pitched in, but they couldn’t find her either.”“The CIA!”“Yeah. Ian Whitfield said he’d heard about Viggie being missing and offered to send resources to help in the search. But they found nothing.”“Wow, who knew the CIA had such a big heart,” Sean said. He clicked off and tossed his phone onto his bed in disgust. He went to Michelle’s room and relayed to her what Hayes had said.“We need to go get Horatio from his room and clear out of here,” she reminded him. In response, Sean turned and headed off. “Where are you going?”“Down to the dock. To think. Come on. We’ll get Horatio in a little bit.”They walked through the forest path to the boathouse and sat on the dock.“Where could Viggie be?” Michelle asked miserably. “Where?”Sean looked across the river. “I think she’s there,” he said, pointing at Camp Peary. “I think she’s in the same place where her father was killed.”“And Whitfield offering to help was just a cover?” He nodded. “So you think she’s dead?”“It doesn’t look good.”“But why, Sean? Why Viggie?”“Because her father told her things, Michelle. She told us things and somebody found out. And they didn’t want her telling us anything else.”“But how could they know?”“Between Babbage Town and Camp Peary no secret is safe apparently.”She stared across the calm water. Calm at least for now. “I know they’re the CIA, Sean. I know that. But killing a little girl?”“You’re kidding, right? In the interests of national security they’d kill their own grandmothers.”She said, “What could Monk Turing have found out that would make the CIA come after him? And then kidnap Viggie?”“I don’t know enough and I’m apparently not smart enough to figure it out from the little I do know. But this I’m certain of: Monk was murdered, and so was Len Rivest. I don’t know the motives yet, and they might have been killed by different people or organizations and for different reasons but murdered they were. And Monk Turing knew an old man who it seems probable was a prisoner over there, and who told him something about that place. Something that led Monk to go there. And die.”“So Henry Fox escaped the place, but Monk didn’t. That’s ironic.”“Seems that way,” Sean said miserably.“And now Viggie.” Michelle choked back a sob and Sean put his arm around her.“I’m sorry, Michelle. I’ve really messed things up on this one.”“We both left her alone, Sean,” she replied. “Both of us.”Sean looked thoughtful. “We left the cottage this morning around six. It was still mostly dark. Alicia was at Hut Number One working on the code. So basically anyone could have come and taken Viggie after that. In a fast boat she’s across the river to Camp Peary in minutes.” The tears trickled down Michelle’s cheeks as he was speaking.He handed her his handkerchief and she dried her eyes. “Now what?” she asked.He stared across the river. “Now I go over the fence.”She pulled away from him. “What?”“It’s the only way, Michelle. I messed up and left Viggie unprotected. I can’t sit by and not do anything. I have to try and save her.”“Okay, when do you want to go?”“You’re not going.”“Then neither are you.”“Michelle, I can’t let you do it. Hell, I could be wrong about the whole thing. I can’t let you throw your whole life away.”“What life, Sean? I don’t even know who I am some days. The only life I care about right now is Viggie Turing’s. So if you’re going over that damn fence, so am I.”He stared at her, partly with pride over her refusal to abandon him. And partly with fear as Joan’s and Horatio’s warnings came back to him.“Sean,” she said, “the CIA flight will be coming in tomorrow night. Do you think they may try and get Viggie out that way? Maybe they’ll keep her alive until then.”He didn’t answer. Sean looked out at the river. Did he really want to mix it up with the likes of Ian Whitfield? Did he really want to take it to this guy? The answer was no. And, of course, yes.An idea suddenly interrupted these thoughts. He jumped up. “Come on!”Simple Genius
