---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_077.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["sean", "freeman", "said", "camp", "michelle", "looked", "back", "get", "something", "well", "dunmore", "peary", "south", "virginia", "found", "tell", "u", "sure", "damn", "gold", "right", "take", "hand", "girl", "even"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit077html

---


Unknown
Chapter 77They decided to take the boat downriver to pick up the equipment that Sean had ordered for their assault on Camp Peary. After that Sean led them on a detour to see South Freeman. Arch, Virginia, wasn’t on the river, so they had to dock the boat at an old pier and hike about a half–mile inland. Sean used Michelle’s cell phone to call ahead and although it was late they found South seated at his desk smoking a cigarette as usual, his hands flying over the keyboard. “Girl disappears from Babbage Town. It’s all over the place. Hot stuff. And even better it’s Monk Turing’s little girl. Gonna bring out a special edition. Make my whole life and please tell me it’s got something to do with the spooks across that river.”“It has something to do with a little girl who might be dead,” Michelle said severely. “Do you journalists ever stop and think about that?”He stopped typing, wheeled around in his chair and scowled at her. “Hey, I got nothing against that child. I pray they find her safe and sound and arrest whoever took her. But news is news.”Michelle looked away in disgust.Sean said, “South, was there any talk of something valuable over at Camp Peary? I mean back when the Navy operated it during the Second World War?”“Valuable? Not that I can recall. Except for the old neighborhoods and the CIA’s facilities, it’s just woods, mostly, and a few ponds. Why?”Sean looked disappointed. “I was hoping you’d say there was buried treasure there, you know from a ship sinking or something.”Freeman cracked a smile. “Well, now there is a legend about that, but trust me, it’s a load of bull.”Horatio said, “Tell us about it, South.”“Why? You sure as hell can’t get to it if it’s at Camp Peary.”“Humor us,” Sean said.Freeman leaned back in his chair and settled down to tell his tale. “Well, this takes us back, way back, into colonial times, in fact.”“Can you just get to the point?” Michelle snapped impatiently.He jerked up straight. “Hey, lady, I don’t have to tell you a damn thing!”Sean held up a calming hand. “Just take your time, South.” He sat down in a chair across from Freeman and glared at Michelle, who reluctantly perched on the edge of the desk and gazed stonily at the journalist.Freeman looked appeased, sat back and began again. “You remember me telling you about that Lord Dunmore character?”“The last royal governor of Virginia, yes,” Sean said.“Well, local legend has it the British sent over tons of gold to help finance the war. They were going to use it to pay for spies, for the German mercenaries fighting for the Brits and also to get the population on their side. And Dunmore was supposed to get the Indians riled up against the Americans so they’d have to fight them at the same time they had their hands full with the redcoats. A lot of people don’t realize it but back then most citizens kept flip–flopping on which side they wanted to win. Mostly, it was based on who’d won the last big battle and which army was in their backyard. So the gold Dunmore supposedly had could’ve caused a lot of damage.”“But Dunmore was in Williamsburg,” Sean pointed out.“But he got run out by the colonials,” Freeman countered. “And he had to hightail it to his hunting lodge, Porto Bello, the same lodge that’s on the National Register. It’s located pretty much smack in the middle of Camp Peary.” He stood and pointed to a map. “Right about there.” He resumed his seat.“If the gold ended up in Porto Bello what could’ve happened to it?” Sean asked as he started pacing.“Who knows? But it didn’t end up there, because it never existed.”“You’re certain of that?” Sean said from across the room.“Let’s be realistic here. If that treasure was at Camp Peary somebody would’ve found it, and they would’ve told somebody. You can’t keep something like that quiet.”“What if no one has found it yet?” Sean replied.“I doubt Dunmore was smart enough to hide a mountain of gold so well that nobody could find it.”Michelle said, “Camp Peary is thousands of acres. There are probably some parts of it that to this day neither the Navy nor the CIA has even explored.”Freeman looked extremely doubtful about that. “Yeah, well even if it is there ain’t nobody gonna be able to get to it now. So unless the spooks find it, it’s not gonna get found. Right?” He looked over at Sean, who was staring at something on the wall. “Am I right?” Freeman said again in a louder voice.Sean’s gaze was fixed on a piece of paper tacked to the wall.Michelle looked concerned. “Sean, what is it?”Sean spun around. “South, this list of places in Virginia that no longer exist, the one you showed us before, is it accurate? You’re sure?”Freeman rose and walked over to him. “Sure I’m sure. That list came right from the folks in Richmond. It’s the official list.”“Damn, that’s it!” Sean exclaimed.“What’s it?” Horatio cried out.In answer Sean stabbed his finger at one name on the list. “There was a county in Virginia named Dunmore.”“Yep,” Freeman said gleefully. “Only after they run the rascal out, they put an end to that. Now it’s called Shenandoah County. Real pretty area.”Sean rushed out, the others following him. It wasn’t the damn musical notes, or the lyrics. It was the name of the song. Shenandoah. That was the key.Freeman ran to the door and called after them. “What’s so important about Shenandoah County?” He fell silent and then yelled, “Don’t you forget our deal. I want a damn Pulitzer! You hear me!”Simple Genius
