---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_005.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["sean", "horatio", "michelle", "said", "get", "bar", "think", "want", "made", "looked", "okay", "feel", "guy", "better", "next", "old", "friend", "barnes", "black", "harley", "problem", "fight", "took", "large", "man"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit005html

---


Unknown
Chapter 5The next morning Sean called an old friend, Horatio Barnes, a psychologist in northern Virginia. In his fifties, Horatio wore a ponytail and sported a furry, silver goatee. He favored faded jeans and black T–shirts and rode a vintage Harley. He made a specialty of helping federal law enforcement folks through myriad problems caused by the stress related to their work, which is how Sean had met him.Sean filled Horatio in on the event at the bar and his discussion with Rodney about the fight. He made an appointment and took Michelle to see him under the pretense of a doctor’s visit for her injuries.Located in an otherwise abandoned warehouse, Horatio Barnes’s office was large and airy, with rows of dirty windows and books stacked on the floor. His desk was made out of construction sawhorses with what looked to be a large door placed across them. The man’s black Harley motorcycle was parked in one corner.“In this neighborhood, if I left it outside, it wouldn’t stay there, now would it?” he explained with a broad smile. “Okay, Sean, out of here. Michelle doesn’t need your sorry butt listening in while she tells me everything about herself.” Sean obediently left them, waiting in a small, cluttered anteroom. After an hour Horatio came out, leaving Michelle sitting in his office.“Okay, she’s got some serious issues going on,” Horatio said.“How serious?” Sean asked cautiously.“Deep enough to qualify for some inside time.”“Don’t you do that when you think the person’s a threat to herself or others?”“I believe she went into that bar partly to die.”Sean flinched. “Michelle said that?”“No. It’s my job to read between the lines.”“Where is this place?”Horatio said, “Reston. A private clinic. But it’s not cheap, my friend.”“I’ll get the money. Somehow.”Horatio sat down on an old packing crate and motioned for Sean to do the same. “So talk to me, Sean. Tell me what you think the problem is.”And Sean talked for a half–hour, explaining what had happened to them both in Wrightsburg.Horatio said, “Frankly, I’m surprised you’re not both in therapy. You sure you’re okay?”“It affected us both, but Michelle was hit a lot harder.”“She obviously feels that she can’t trust her judgment anymore, and with her that’s a big deal.”Sean said, “And she cared for the guy too. And then to find out what he was really like. I guess that would screw anyone up.”Horatio scrutinized him. “And how did you feel about that?”Sean gaped. “A guy slaughtering a bunch of people? How the hell do you think I felt about it?”“No, I meant about Michelle becoming involved with another man?”Sean’s face took on a more subdued expression. “Oh. Well, I had my own personal involvement at the time.”“That wasn’t exactly what I was referring to.”Sean looked at him quizzically, but his friend didn’t pursue it.Sean said, “Do you think she can get better?”“If she really wants to. If she’s ambivalent about getting better we can at least show her the steps she can take to get there.”“What if she doesn’t want to get better?”“That’s a different planet altogether.” Horatio paused. “But remember that I said she was in that bar partly to die? Well, Michelle going in there and picking a fight with the biggest son of a bitch she could find may be the best sign that she actually wants to get better.”Sean looked at him oddly. “How do you figure that?”“It was a cry for help, Sean; an awkward one, but a cry nevertheless. What’s curious is why she chose now to do it. She’s obviously had these issues for a long time.”“Any guess?”“Like I said, she feels she can’t trust her instincts anymore. Next stop, that bar and the end of that guy’s fist. Her punishment.”“Punishment? For what?”“I don’t know.”“What if she doesn’t want to admit herself to the facility?” Sean said.“We’ll never get an involuntary commit from a judge. Either she puts herself in or I have to counsel her on the outside.”“Then I’ll get her inside, somehow.”“How?”“By wearing my lawyer hat and lying my ass off.”Simple Genius
