---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_042.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["viggie", "michelle", "sean", "said", "alicia", "girl", "going", "okay", "hand", "mick", "little", "way", "next", "room", "made", "look", "eye", "put", "sat", "would", "head", "must", "really", "nodded", "handle"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit042html

---


Unknown
Chapter 42Sean grabbed hold of Michelle’s arm and said, “Viggie? Viggie is that you?”The sounds became clearer now. It was someone whimpering.Sean led the way into the next room and found a light switch.Viggie was huddled in a chair against the wall. She was dressed in her pajamas and her hair was down around her shoulders. It made her look older than did the pigtails. Her eyes were red from crying and the expression on her face was that of a person who hurt everywhere.Michelle quickly holstered her gun and strode over to the girl. She bent down and said quietly, “Sweetie, are you okay?”Whether it was the gentleness of Michelle’s words or the worried look on her features, Viggie put out a hand and Michelle took it in hers.Sean said, “Viggie, has something happened? Is Alicia here?”Viggie said nothing, keeping her gaze fixed on Michelle.“Stay with her, I’m going to check on Alicia.” Sean raced up the stairs while Michelle sat down on the floor and stroked Viggie’s hand.“It’s going to be okay, Viggie. I’m Michelle. Michelle Maxwell. I’m a friend of Sean’s. You can call me Michelle, or even Mick if you want.”“Mick,” Viggie said immediately and wiped her eyes with her free hand.“And is it okay if I call you Viggie or would you prefer Miss Turing?”Viggie shook her head. “Viggie,” she whispered.“Viggie it is. That’s a cool name. I’ve met lots of Michelle’s but I’ve never met a Viggie before. That means you must be really special.”Viggie nodded, as though in agreement, but her grip tightened on Michelle’s fingers. “Mick,” she said again.“We’re friends now. Okay?”Viggie slowly nodded, her eyes searching Michelle’s as though for any hint of doubt, or worse, untruth.When Sean returned he had Alicia in tow. Michelle looked up and noted the woman’s sleepy features and then, visible at the bottom of her calf–length pajama pants, the artificial leg. Sean made quick introductions.“I didn’t know she had come downstairs,” Alicia said. She focused on Sean with an angry look. “We waited for you until it was very late.”“I’m sorry, Alicia, I got hung up on something else.”“Maybe we should just rethink the arrangement then.”“I’m here,” Michelle said, rising from the floor, but still holding on to Viggie’s hand. “I’m Michelle Maxwell, Sean’s partner. Between the two of us we’ll be able to handle things now.”Alicia stared at Sean for a long moment and then nodded her head at Michelle. “I see that you and Viggie have already made friends.”Michelle smiled at the girl. “I think Viggie and I will be great friends.”Viggie jumped up and raced to the piano in the other room. From the darkness they heard the song she was playing.Michelle turned to Sean. “Wow, that’s amazing.”“It’s Viggie’s way of showing that she likes you,” Alicia explained.“Why was she so upset?” Sean asked.She said in a low voice, “That damn FBI agent, Ventris, came by earlier tonight. He started going into Monk’s death. And Viggie overheard him.”“Oh, hell!” Sean exclaimed.“You should’ve seen Viggie a few hours ago. She was inconsolable. I had to tell her the truth. I couldn’t lie to her, not when she was like that. I finally had the staff doctor prescribe a sedative for her. She was asleep when I finally went to bed, but I guess the meds wore off.”Sean said, “What the hell was Ventris doing here talking to you?”“He wanted to question Viggie at first, but I put my foot down. I don’t think he meant for her to overhear him, but he didn’t stick around to help with her either.”“What did he want to know?” Michelle asked.“If I had any idea why Monk Turing would have gone to Camp Peary. Or if he’d mentioned going there before.”Sean and Michelle exchanged quizzical expressions. Sean said, “I was told that officially the Bureau thinks Monk killed himself.”Alicia coaxed Viggie off the piano, but the little girl refused to go to sleep until Michelle took her hand, led her up the stairs and put her to bed.After they said good night to Alicia, Sean and Michelle settled into their bedrooms. Sean came in and sat on Michelle’s bed while she was still unpacking.“Don’t worry, it won’t take you long to mess up this place,” he commented.“What a comedian you are. So what happened to Alicia’s leg?”Sean explained about her experience in Iraq and her job here at Babbage Town.“Amazing lady.” Michelle added, “It must have been horrible for Viggie to find out that way about her dad.”“It must have been,” Sean agreed. There was a vibrating sound. He groaned and glanced at his phone.Michelle smiled and said, “Let me guess, Little Miss Joanie? Are you going to ignore her again?”“No, if I don’t answer this time she’ll probably head straight down to Babbage Town.”“Wow, that would be a lot of fun,” Michelle said, as she slipped her pistol under the pillow. “Maybe you shouldn’t answer then. If she does come down, I could accidentally shoot her thinking she’s some predator looking for fresh meat. Oh, that won’t work, because she is a predator and my shooting her wouldn’t be an accident.”“You’re not really helping matters. I have to reason with her.”“Go ahead. But while you’re doing that I really want to hear you tell the witch off once and for all.”Sean stood. “That witch is signing our paychecks, or at least mine. So let me just handle this misery in the peace and comfort of my own room.”“Coward. Are you going to tell her I’m here?”“I said let me handle it, Michelle.”“What is it with men and confrontation? Women have no trouble at all going for the jugular.”After he left, Michelle slipped down the hall and opened the door to Viggie’s room. The girl was sitting up in bed in the dark. “It’s me, Mick,” Michelle said.In a tiny voice Viggie said, “Hi, Mick.”“Like me to sit with you for a bit?”Viggie held out her hand.Michelle lay down next to the frightened child in the darkness. As the girl’s hand touched hers, Michelle felt a jolt as the fragments of a distant and unwelcome memory hit her. Another frightened little girl sat all alone in the dark trying to make sense of the indecipherable. In a flash the image was gone, leaving Michelle as puzzled, confused and scared as the little girl next to her.Simple Genius
