---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_073.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["michelle", "sean", "said", "viggie", "alicia", "looked", "name", "joan", "happened", "see", "look", "heinrich", "drove", "monk", "going", "went", "gave", "paper", "german", "hell", "man", "henry", "fuchs", "note", "morning"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit073html

---


Unknown
Chapter 73Sean drove them to the B&B where Horatio had originally been staying. “Joan is faxing me some info,” he explained.They got the documents and drove to a nearby restaurant. Michelle’s stomach had settled down enough that they ordered sandwiches and coffee. She told Sean about Monk going up in the plane.As they ate, they went over the pages Joan had faxed. Sean said, “Monk Turing did visit Wiesbaden.”“How’d they find that out so quickly?”“Joan’s firm has an affiliate in Frankfurt. They were able to track him via his credit card receipts. He bought that beer stein he gave Champ there among other things.” He next looked at several sheets of paper. “This is the list of German POWs held at Camp Peary during World War II that I asked for.”“Okay, how the hell did Joan get that so fast?”“One of their top executives is a former rear admiral and once headed the NSA. He was able to cut through the red tape. And it’s not like this stuff is classified anymore. Just gathering mold in some office in the Pentagon.”They went down the list of Germans. Each name had the man’s date of capture, rank and what had happened to him.Sean said, “You can see that most of them were released at the end of the war or else died in captivity. But I don’t see a Henry Fox listed.”“Wait a minute. Look at this guy.” Michelle’s finger pointed at a blank space. “There’s nothing here that says what happened to him.” She scanned the pages. “And he’s the only one.”Sean looked at the man’s name. “Heinrich Fuchs.”“Heinrich Fuchs,” Michelle repeated slowly. “Anglicized, that might be Henry Fox.”Sean stared at her. “I think you’re right, and for a very good reason.”“What’s that?”“Because I’m betting everything I have, little though it is, that Heinrich Fuchs was a German naval radio operator and that he was also the only man to escape from the naval stockade that is now the CIA’s Camp Peary. That’s why there’s a blank in the space as to what happened to him. The Navy wasn’t going to admit anyone escaped.”Michelle drew in a sharp breath. “Escaped and changed his name to Henry Fox?”“And moved to New York, set up another life, grew old and ended up living in the same apartment building as Monk and Viggie Turing.” He jumped up. “Come on. We need to see Viggie.”“Why?”“Horatio says she was programmed. Well, the name Heinrich Fuchs may be the key she needs to tell us more. Maybe everything.”•    •    •They drove to Babbage Town and hustled to the schoolroom where Viggie and the other children were. Only Viggie wasn’t there.“She said she was sick,” the teacher said.“She told you in person?” Sean asked.“No, she sent in a note. It was on my desk this morning when I got in.”A few minutes later Sean and Michelle were rushing up the steps to Alicia’s cottage. They burst through the door and Michelle called out, “Viggie? Viggie!”She hurtled up the stairs and threw open Viggie’s bedroom door. The room was empty and she clattered back downstairs. She and Sean searched the rest of the cottage.“No sign of her,” he said, his voice panicky.“Where the hell is her guard?” Michelle demanded.The door to the cottage opened and Alicia walked in. She was holding a bundle of papers and looked very tired. She seemed surprised to see them here and then said in a scolding tone, “Okay, you two, I’ve run every possible configuration of these damn notes through our strongest computer programs and came up with gibberish every time. So either the code is beyond our capability to decipher it, or it’s not code at all, which is the conclusion I’m fast coming to. I did find out the name of the song. It’s ‘Shenandoah,’ from the nineteenth century. Anyway, what do you know, it has lyrics, not many, none of it spectacular, but it has words. So I had the brilliant idea that perhaps the lyrics were the key to the code. I hit them with everything we had, in every conceivable combination. And do you know what? It was still all gibberish.”They just stood there staring at her.“What is it?” she said suspiciously.“Where’s Viggie?” Michelle asked quietly.Alicia looked at her watch. “She’s in school. She’s been in school since eight o’clock.”“She’s not there, Alicia,” Sean said. “The teacher said someone left a note on her desk this morning saying that Viggie was sick.”She gave them both searching looks. “I’ve been up all night trying to make sense of this garbage. You were supposed to look after her.”“She was fine early this morning,” Michelle explained. “She came to my room a bit before dawn. Then she went back to her room.”“Then what?” Alicia said.Sean and Michelle looked at each other. Sean said in an uncomfortable tone, “Then we left to run down some leads.”“Leaving her alone!” Alicia exclaimed. “You left Viggie alone? Again!”“We thought you were here,” Michelle explained.Alicia threw the papers up in the air. “You thought I was here? How the hell could I be here when you gave me this mess to deal with?” She drew several deep breaths. “Her guard is supposed to escort her to school. I requested a new one directly after that other fool let Viggie wander away and almost drown.”Sean looked at her curiously. “Who did you request the guard from?”“Champ.”Michelle said, “Champ picked me up at nine to go to the plane.”“What are you talking about, what plane?” Alicia said fiercely.“Just calm down, Alicia. Viggie might have just gone off by herself,” Sean said.“Look what happened the last time she did that!”“She’s right, Sean. I’m going to check down by the river.”“I’ll get a security team to start looking over the grounds here,” he said.They both headed out, leaving Alicia Chadwick staring helplessly down at the mess of papers.Simple Genius
