---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_037.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["michelle", "sean", "horatio", "know", "thing", "little", "would", "good", "tell", "barry", "go", "get", "going", "see", "want", "way", "left", "head", "case", "facility", "said", "told", "man", "sandy", "hell"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit037html

---


Unknown
Chapter 37After suffering through an early dinner and attending the eating disorder session with Cheryl, Michelle checked herself out of the facility. Before leaving she visited with Sandy.“I checked with my buddy at the U.S. Marshals. He said they’re sick of Barry pulling this crap. They’re kicking him out of Witness Protection and told the prosecutors to go for the max.”“I can’t thank you enough, Michelle. I don’t know what would’ve happened if that gun had been loaded.”“Hey, that’s what psycho friends are for.”“Now stop worrying about me and go get that man of yours.”“Sandy, we’re just friends.”“But you are going to see him?”“Hell yes. I miss him.”“Good, then you can see if you still want to be just friends.”As Michelle was heading out, Sandy called after her, “Don’t forget to invite me to the wedding. And if I were you I’d invest in a metal detector. With your line of work you never know who might show up to your nuptials.”On the way out Michelle left a message for Horatio Barnes with the head nurse. “Tell Mr. Harley–Davidson he can check me off his to–do list. I’m cured.”“I’m glad our treatment plan was so effective for you.”“Oh, it had nothing to do with your treatment plan. It was all about nailing that weasel Barry. I’d take that over happy pills any day.” Michelle slammed the door on her way out.She breathed in the fresh evening air and took a cab to the new apartment. Using the set of keys Sean had left her, she went inside and proceeded to mess up her part of the digs. She even tossed a few of Sean’s things around. He’d pick them up when he got back of course, sick neatnik that the man was, but she’d at least force him to make the effort.Then she nearly sprinted to her truck and drove around for a half–hour with the windows down, Aerosmith blasting in the CD chute and the comforting feel of her junk underfoot. All she had needed was a little R&R, she told herself. Sure the sessions with Barnes had been a real bitch, but she’d survived them too. In a war of wills, she had had little doubt who was going to prevail.And then all thoughts of Horatio Barnes left her mind as she focused on her next plan of action: joining Sean. She should probably call him and let him know she was coming. Yet Michelle hardly ever opted for the proper thing. And though she didn’t want to admit it, a little piece of her was afraid that if she did call Sean, he would tell her not to come.When she got back to her apartment Michelle found what she needed after a quick search of Sean’s things: a file copy on Babbage Town complete with directions. Sean had said he was taking a small plane there, no doubt courtesy of little Miss Joan the pain–in–the–ass. Michelle opted to drive. She gauged the trip would take about four hours for normal drivers but with her illegal radar detector and her foot mashed to the floorboard she was confident she could drive it in under three. The fact that she was not employed by Joan’s company did not deter her in the slightest. The case was the thing. And if she knew one thing, Michelle understood quite clearly that together on the hunt she and Sean were nearly unstoppable. That’s what it was really all about. Not her. Them.She packed a bag and hit the road, stopping only for a twenty–four–ounce high–octane coffee and three PowerBars. Her adrenaline was sky–high. God, it felt so good to be alive. And free.•    •    •Horatio went straight from the airport to the psychiatric facility to find his star patient had flown the coop.“Did she say where she was going?” he asked the head nurse.“No, but she asked me to tell you that she’s cured.”“Oh, really? She’s into self–diagnosis now?”“I don’t know, but let me tell you what she did while she was here.” The nurse quickly explained about Barry and Sandy, Witness Protection and the drug bust.“She did all that in the time I was away? Hell, I wasn’t gone that long!”“That lady doesn’t let grass or apparently anything else grow under her feet. I heard she kicked Barry’s butt pretty good. You know, I never liked him.”“Isn’t hindsight wonderful,” Horatio grumbled as he walked away.“Good night to you too, Mr. Harley–Davidson,” the nurse muttered.Horatio thought things over. He had to make deductions about what Michelle would do now. Actually, it wasn’t that difficult. She would without a doubt want to hook up with Sean. She might be headed there right now. Legally, there was nothing Horatio could do to stop her. But he also knew that the woman was not cured. The incident that had happened at the bar could happen again, manifesting itself in a different and more deadly form.He was debating whether to alert Sean when his phone rang.“Speak of the devil, I was just about to call you,” Horatio said.Sean chuckled. “I’d make that quip about great minds, but I’m actually surrounded by big brains down here, so I’ll forgo the opportunity. I’m on my way to meet with the head of Camp Peary but I wanted to ask you something.”“Camp Peary? As in the CIA Farm?”“The one and only. I’ve got a favor to ask you.” He explained about Viggie. “I know it’s a pain wanting you to come down because you’re busy with Michelle and the rest of your practice.”Horatio cut in. “Actually, I’m not. My favorite patient went AWOL on me.” He brought Sean up to date on both Michelle’s adventure at the facility and her checking herself out.“Damn, leave it to her to find trouble wherever she goes,” Sean said, but there was a touch of pride in his voice at what she’d done.“And my best guess is she’s on the way to see you.”“Me? I told her a little about the case, but not where it was.”“Did you leave anything back at the apartment?”Sean groaned. “Oh, hell, I left a file copy there because I don’t have an office.”“Your organizational instincts are commendable, but that means she’ll probably be there by morning if not sooner.”“Joan will pitch a fit. They don’t really get along.”“Astonishing. I’ll head down tomorrow. Is there a place to stay nearby?”“I can probably get you a bunk at Babbage Town. So what do I do when Michelle shows up?”“Act normal, she certainly will seem to be.”“Have you made any progress on her case?”“I had an interesting trip to Tennessee that I’ll fill you in on when I see you. I have to thank you for bringing me in on what has been a fascinating case. This Viggie sounds interesting too.”“Horatio, this whole place is interesting. And more than a little dangerous right now, so if you want to respectfully decline I won’t hold it against you.”“I’ll pretend I didn’t hear that.”“Is Michelle any better?”“We need to help her clean up her soul, Sean, so she won’t have to worry about a bomb ever going off again. And I’m not letting go until we get her to that point.”“I’ll be right there with you, Horatio.”“Good, because from what I’ve seen of that woman, there’s not a man alive who can take her by himself.”“Tell me something I don’t know.”Simple Genius
