---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_056.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["sean", "horatio", "said", "get", "michelle", "back", "ventris", "two", "right", "car", "go", "caught", "good", "like", "mean", "know", "babbage", "valerie", "see", "least", "question", "looked", "truck", "want", "let"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit056html

---


Unknown
Chapter 56Sean had arranged for a rental car in Williamsburg and drove back to Babbage Town after dinner with Valerie. He crossed the bridge over the York and was passing Gloucester Point when the car that had been following him all evening caught up and forced him off the road. Before Sean could get out a man was at the driver’s window.“Get out of the car,” he screamed at Sean, waving his ID.FBI Special Agent Mike Ventris wasn’t exactly exuding the warm fuzzies.“Can I ask what this is in reference to?” Sean said politely.“Shut the hell up and get in my car! Now!”Sean followed him back to his federal–issued cruiser. He climbed in the passenger side while Ventris ducked in the driver’s seat. When the doors slammed shut Ventris turned to him and snapped, “What do you think you’re doing, you idiot?”Sean said calmly, “I was driving back to Babbage Town when you ran me off the road. Is it time for your wheels refresher course at the Bureau or do you just do that for kicks?”“Knock off the wise–ass crap. First, you went to see Ian Whitfield.”“Actually he summoned me and Sheriff Hayes.”“And after that you met his wife at a bar.”“No, we just ran into each other.”“And you just had dinner with her.”“Not a crime, at least that I’m aware of.”“What exactly is your relationship with Valerie Messaline?”“We were drawn together by a common love of a good Mojito.”Ventris shoved a finger against Sean’s chest. “I am this far from arresting your ass.”“Can I ask the charge?”“I can lock you up for forty–eight hours no questions asked. In the meantime I can probably find something that’ll stick.”“I’m down here working, just like you. Trying to find out who killed Monk Turing and Len Rivest. Remember the little competition I mentioned?”“And I told you to stay out of my way.”“I wasn’t aware that Valerie Messaline constituted being in your way.”“She has no involvement in this case and neither does Ian Whitfield. The man has more important things to worry about than a dipshit PI poking around where he shouldn’t.”Sean looked at him in disbelief. “Since when is the Bureau the CIA’s lapdog?”“I’m telling you for your own good to back off. There are far more important issues here than a couple of murders.”“Care to share?”“Get out of my car. And if we have to meet again, you really won’t like it.”Sean climbed out of the vehicle and then tapped on the window. “By the way, any news on the ‘gas leak’ at the morgue?”Ventris almost ran over Sean’s foot as the car roared off.Despite the smart–ass attitude he’d taken with Ventris, Sean wasn’t smiling as he trudged back to his car. He was getting in deeper by the second and so far nothing made any sense at all. As he drove back to Babbage Town Sean knew what he had to do next.•    •    •“You can’t be serious, Sean,” Horatio said. The three of them were standing next to Michelle’s truck and Horatio’s Harley, which were parked along a dirt road about a mile from Babbage Town.“Monk Turing went over the fence at Camp Peary and look what happened to him,” Horatio continued.“Trust me, I don’t want to go over that fence, but I’m running out of options,” Sean replied evenly.Michelle leaned back against her truck and studied her partner. “When do you propose we do it?”Horatio gaped at her. “You’re planning on going with this nutcase?”Sean looked at Michelle. “I go alone.”“Don’t even bother. You go, I go.”“If we get caught we are up shit’s creek,” he told her. “I mean really up.”“You’re never boring; I have to give you that,” she replied.“Will you two listen to what you’re saying,” Horatio pleaded. “This is the CIA for God’s sake. You could be executed for treason.”“We’ll go on Saturday,” Sean said in answer to Michelle’s previous question. “If we don’t get a break in the case by then.”She said, “The next scheduled flight?” He nodded.“I don’t know if you noticed on the map in South Freeman’s office, but the —”She finished for him, “The runway is on the other side of the line of trees where they found Monk’s body. So we’re doing a recon on the flight?”“At the very least it’ll be interesting to see who or what gets off the damn plane.”“Okay, you are really freaking me out here, Sean,” Horatio said. He added, “You know I can’t let you two do this.”Sean turned on him. “If you don’t want us to go over the fence then you come up with a way for us to get to the truth. You’re big on the truth, aren’t you? You’ve been working with Viggie and Michelle trying to do that, right?”“That’s different.”“It’s not different to me. Three men have been killed. Every instinct I have tells me Camp Peary is at the center of it. Someone from there tried to kill me. I can’t walk away from that.”“Then take it to the authorities.”“Sheriff Hayes would have a coronary if he knew what we were planning. Ventris would just shoot me and pretend his gun went off accidentally. I filled Hayes in on my dinner with Valerie and my little encounter with Ventris, but that’s it. I let you in on this because I trust you. And I’d never do anything to screw you.”“What’re you talking about?” Horatio asked nervously.“If we get caught the cops will try to round up whoever they think’s involved with us. That means you. So here’s your chance to go home, right now. Michelle and I will swear you knew nothing about it.”Horatio leaned against the truck. “Well, I have to say, most felons I’ve worked with aren’t nearly as considerate.”“And if we get through this and get back home, you can still see Michelle.” Sean looked at his partner. “If she wants to,” he hastily added.Michelle remained quiet.“And if I choose to stay?” Horatio asked.“There’s no problem if we don’t get caught. If we do, the cops might start nosing around if you’re still around. I can’t guarantee you won’t become a target.”“If you do get caught I can help build a great insanity defense for you both.”Sean smiled. “It’s nice to have options.”Horatio said, “But you’re risking your life, Sean.”“So? I’ve spent most of my adult life doing that.”Michelle added, “After a while, it sort of becomes instinctual, you know?”Horatio watched as the two exchanged a very knowing look that only came between two people who’d put life and limb on the line on a regular basis. “Viggie knows something. Codes and blood. If we can just find out what it means, it might crack everything wide open without you two going over that damn fence.”“Any good investigator follows up multiple leads because most don’t pan out. It’s a simple numbers game. But right now my focus is on the plot of land across the river.”“In the meantime,” Michelle said, “I can take a run at Champ.”Sean said, “And I can talk to Alicia too.”“What’s the weather forecast for Saturday night?” Michelle asked.“Cool and overcast.”“We have time to prep at least. We’ll need some things.”“I’ve already called in for them.”“So Joan didn’t ask questions?”“I didn’t use Joan, because I don’t trust her, at least not with this.”“I don’t want to hear any more of this,” Horatio said, pretending to cover his ears. “I’m already an accessory before the fact as it is.”“Not to worry. Like I said, if we’re caught we won’t rat you out.” He grinned. “Unless we can cut a better deal by selling your ass down the river.”“What I did to deserve friends like you I don’t know.”Sean said, “Horatio, we do need to follow up with Viggie. Codes and blood. You’re right, that’s got to mean something.”“I can do another session with her,” Horatio said.“I’ve gotten pretty close to her,” Michelle said. “Let me try.”Horatio looked at her. “Did she say she liked you?”“Yes. And she said she doesn’t like you.”“Your sheer enjoyment in communicating that fact is duly noted,” the psychologist commented blandly.Sean said, “The other thing that’s puzzling is that if I’m right and Rivest was killed, no one saw anyone leaving his cottage. His place is on the main drag. Someone had to see something.”Horatio said, “You’re sure your sheriff buddy is asking the right people the right questions?”“I assumed he was. Maybe that assumption was wrong. Maybe we should do it ourselves.”“So what do I do while you two are preparing to be slaughtered?”“Does that mean —” Sean began but Horatio cut him off.“Yeah, I’m staying. I must be as nuts as you. But the good news is I’ll have plenty of time for counseling inside the big house after we’re all busted. So give me an assignment before I come to my senses, jump on my Harley and ride like hell away from you two psychos.”“You can go and talk to a guy named South Freeman over in Arch, Virginia. He runs the newspaper there and has a good handle on the local history. Tell him we sent you. Learn everything you can about the area from him.”As the meeting broke up Horatio whispered to Michelle. “Thought anymore about the hypnosis?”“I’ll make a deal with you. If I come back alive I’ll let you hypnotize me.”“Just the fact that you two are seriously contemplating this means you’re both certifiable. You know that, right?”“Wish me luck, Horatio.”As she closed the truck door, he said grudgingly, “Good luck.”Simple Genius
