---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_030.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["viggie", "said", "alicia", "sean", "number", "key", "know", "would", "one", "public", "think", "like", "time", "might", "looked", "going", "right", "girl", "around", "staring", "million", "see", "people", "world", "prime"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit030html

---


Unknown
Chapter 30Sean had expected to find a shy, quiet type in Viggie Turing; however, the girl was full of energy, and her wide, blue eyes seemed to capture every movement around her. She wore a bright red shirt, Capri pants and was barefoot. After being introduced by Alicia, Viggie immediately took Sean’s hand and led him over to the piano.“Sit.”He sat.“You play?” she asked, staring at him with a pair of eyes that were uncomfortably intense.“Bass guitar. Only four strings, not so complicated. And when you’re losing millions of brain cells every day like I am that’s a good thing.”She didn’t bother to acknowledge his little joke. Viggie sat down and played a tune that he’d never heard before.“Okay, you stumped me,” he said. “Who is it?”Alicia supplied the answer. “ ‘Vigenère Turing.’ It’s an original composition.”Sean stared at the girl, impressed.“You like it?” she asked simply.He nodded. “You’re a very gifted musician.”She smiled, and Sean could finally see the eleven–year–old girl inside, for it was a shy, eager–to–please sort of expression. And this scared him. It might make her trust people she shouldn’t. Spies here, Rivest had said.“Viggie, do you —”She started playing another song. When she finished, Viggie got up and walked over to a chair at the kitchen table and stared out the window. As Sean watched, her wide, dancing eyes retreated to slits.Sean rose. “Viggie?”Sean looked over at Alicia, who was motioning him to join her on the couch.Speaking quietly she said, “She sort of withdraws into a little world of her own. If we wait she’ll come around.”“Has she been seen by experts? Is she on medication?”“I don’t know about the experts, but she’s not on medication. Now that I’m her guardian I’m going to look into it right away.”“What do you know about Viggie’s mom?”“Monk said they were divorced, years ago. He had full custody.”“That’s what Rivest said. But you know, Alicia, if Viggie’s mother shows up a court will likely grant her custody unless she’s in prison or otherwise incapable of taking care of her daughter.”“But Monk appointed me guardian.”“That doesn’t matter when a parent is involved.”“I’m not going to worry about that until it happens.”“18,313 and 22,307.”They turned to look at Viggie, who was now staring at them.“Those are the prime factors of 408,508,091,” the girl explained. “Aren’t they?”Alicia nodded. “That’s right. If you multiply 18,313 and 22,307 you get 408,508,091.”Viggie clapped her hands together and giggled.“But I just gave you that number barely an hour ago. How did you come up with them so fast?” Alicia asked.“I saw them, in my head.”Alicia said eagerly, “Were they lined up? Were you doing math in your head again?”“No. It just popped into my mind. I didn’t have to do math.”“At least not any math of which mere mortals are aware,” Alicia said thoughtfully. “Viggie, I think Mr. Sean wanted to ask you something.” Viggie looked at him expectantly.“Well, I just wanted you to know that I’ll be coming to see you. Would that be okay?”Viggie looked at Alicia, who nodded.“I guess so,” Viggie said. “But I should really check with Monk.”“You call your dad by his first name?”“He calls me by my first name. Isn’t that what people do?”“I guess it is. I haven’t met your dad, but he sounds like a really cool guy.”“He is. He played in a rock band in college.” Viggie looked out the window again and Sean was afraid she was about to lapse into one of her “funks,” but she merely said, “I wish he’d come home soon. There are lots of things I have to tell him.”“Like what?” Sean asked, perhaps a little too quickly.Viggie immediately rose and started playing the piano again, louder and louder.When she momentarily stopped, Sean said, “Viggie, when was the last time you saw you dad?” This query only caused her to play even more fiercely.“Viggie!” Sean said, but Alicia was already pulling him toward the front door as Viggie smashed her fists down on the keyboard and raced out of the room. A few seconds later they heard a door slam. An instant later the woman Sean had seen sleeping on the couch the night before entered the room.Alicia said, “I’ll be back in a few minutes to check on her, Mrs. Graham.” Alicia led Sean from the house.“Okay, I see your problem with Viggie,” he said, scratching his head.“I think she knows, deep down, that there’s something wrong with her father. Anytime anyone starts nibbling around that subject she just shuts down.”He caught sight of Viggie staring at them from her bedroom window and then, like a thought he’d lost in his head, she was gone.Sean turned to Alicia. “Those numbers she told you. Couldn’t she have figured it out on a calculator?”“Yes, but it would have taken her about a full day to do it. 18,313 is the 2,000th prime number, meaning she would have to have gone through all those that preceded it to see if it divided into 408,508,091 without leaving a remainder. She just saw it in her head, like she said.”“And tell me why this is so important?”“Sean —”“Damn it, Alicia, people are dying here. I’ve agreed to protect Viggie because you think she’s in danger. The least you can do is start telling me why.”“All right. The world runs on information sent electronically. How to move it from A to B safely is the key to civilization. Using your credit card to buy things, getting cash from an ATM, sending an e–mail, paying bills or purchasing things online. Encryption these days is strictly about numbers and their length. The strongest system is based on asymmetric public key cryptography. It’s the only thing that makes electronic transmissions, from government to commercial to private citizens safe and thus viable.”“I think I’ve heard of it. RSA or something?”“Right. Now, the standard public key is typically a very large prime number hundreds of digits long that would take a hundred million PCs, working in parallel several thousand years, to figure out the two factors. However, while everyone knows the public key number, or at least your computer does, the only way to read what’s being sent is by unlocking the public key using the two private keys. Those keys are the two prime factors of the public key and only your computer software knows what they are. To use a simple example, the number fifty might be the public key and ten and five would be the private keys. If you know the numbers ten and five you can read the transmission.”“Like the numbers that Viggie gave you?”“Yes. With computers getting faster all the time and the practice of running hundreds of millions of computers in massive parallel assaults the encryption standards keep getting ratcheted upward. But, still, all you have to do is add a few more digits to the public key and the time required to break it goes up thousands, if not millions of years.”“But your research might just throw a monkey wrench in all that.”“The encryption community is betting on the fact that there is no shortcut to factoring because in 2,000 years of searching no one’s found one. And yet Viggie is able to do it from time to time. Can she do it for bigger numbers? If so, as I said, no electronic transmission is safe and the world as we know it would be drastically different.”“Back to typewriters, couriers and tin cans strung with wire?”“It would shut down business and government; the poor consumer would have no idea how to function. And generals could no longer safely communicate with their armies. I doubt most people realize that as late as the Seventies, before public key cryptography was invented, private businesses and governments had to send thousands of couriers out constantly with new codebooks and passwords. No one wants to go back to those days.”He said, “It’s incredible how our entire civilization is based on not being able to factor huge numbers quickly.”“We made the bed, now we have to lie in it.”“Obviously the public isn’t aware of any of this?”“It would scare the public to death.”“So do you think there’s a shortcut?”“Viggie makes me think there might be one. But despite that, my biggest worry right now isn’t about numbers, it’s about Viggie. I can’t let anything happen to her.”“You think someone knows Viggie might be the key to stopping the world in its tracks?”“You said Len thought there were spies here. Her father knew about her ability and he’s dead. I don’t know. I just don’t know.”Sean once more put a comforting hand on her shoulder. “Nothing’s going to happen to her. The FBI and police are around; the place is crawling with guards.”“That was true before Len was killed,” she pointed out.“But now I’m on the case.”“And how exactly do you propose to protect Viggie?”“How many bedrooms do you have in your bungalow?”“Four. Why?”“One for Viggie, one for you and one for me and one left over.”“You, moving in with me?”“If I stay in the main house, there’s no way I could get to her in time in case something happened.”“I’ll have to get Champ’s approval and talk to Viggie. I get off duty tomorrow around six in the evening. How about then?”“Why don’t you just move into Viggie’s cottage?”“There are too many reminders of Monk there for her. I thought taking her away from that would be best.”“How will you explain it to Viggie?”“I’ll think of something.”Alicia walked off.Sean stood staring after her when his cell phone buzzed. He looked at the number and groaned. It was Joan Dillinger. How was he going to explain taking on not one, but two new assignments? The answer was clear. He just wasn’t going to answer the damn phone.He trudged back to his room and wondered how he was managing to dig the hole he was in ever deeper.Simple Genius
