---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_065.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["michelle", "go", "sean", "said", "like", "tell", "maybe", "look", "monk", "south", "thinking", "morning", "babbage", "talked", "river", "champ", "viggie", "wanted", "get", "camp", "peary", "find", "nodded", "hayes", "got"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit065html

---


Unknown
Chapter 65By early the next morning the bad weather had passed and Sean and Michelle convened at the same isolated spot about a mile from Babbage Town. When they had talked yesterday Michelle had recounted her experience on the river. In turn he’d brought her up to speed about Champ’s lack of an alibi. They were meeting this morning to go over things in more detail away from prying eyes at Babbage Town.He said, “Tell me again what was Viggie doing out on the water in a kayak all by herself?”“She basically said she wanted some alone time.”“Or maybe she wanted to get a better look at Camp Peary?”“Why?” she asked.“I don’t know.”“Did you find out anything on your end?”Sean nodded. “I talked to Hayes. He got a look at Monk’s passport and it shows that he did travel to Germany.”“Do we know where?”“He entered by way of Frankfurt. That’s all Hayes could tell me. I’ve called Joan and she’s trying to run down more specifics for us.” He unrolled a large piece of paper and spread it out over the hood of Michelle’s truck. “I took a picture of the satellite map of Camp Peary that Freeman had in his office and had it enlarged.”He pointed out various sections to her. “I’ve heard different numbers, but I believe the place is about ten thousand acres, most of it undeveloped. As we already knew, the runway is fairly near where Monk’s body was found. A bit south are what appear to be a series of bunkers. Farther down from that is a boat dock.” He traced another section with his finger that had names printed on it. “This looks like some of the neighborhoods Freeman mentioned. Bigler’s Mill Pond is here, Porto Bello house there, Queens Lake behind it and Magruder there. The main complex is bordered on the west by Interstate 64 and to the south by Colonial National Historical Parkway. And the Naval Supply Cheatham Annex is there,” he added, poking the paper with his index finger.“There’s an inlet from the York south of the runway and it carries you deeply into the grounds,” Michelle pointed out.“And we can be sure it’s well guarded,” Sean said. “Certainly on land and for all I know they have the inlet mined.”“So over the fence we go? Did the equipment come in?”Sean nodded. “Yeah, all of it.” He suddenly slumped back against the truck. “Michelle, I don’t want to go over that fence, it’s insane. Even if we don’t get killed I’m not looking to spend the rest of my life in prison, and I’m not going to let you do it.”“But if you do go I can’t let you go alone.”“Maybe we don’t have to if Joan finds out where Monk went in Germany.”“Which may not tie into any of this.”“How about Viggie? Codes and blood?”Michelle shook her head. “Nothing new. She was understandably subdued when we got back from the river. Her piano playing was very restrained which is unusual. Normally she says, ‘Michelle, I like you’, and then she plays like a banshee, screams ‘Codes and Blood’ and then runs up to her room. She didn’t do it this time. She just thanked me for saving her life and then sat and played very slowly and beautifully, like she was thanking me again with music. It was actually very touching. And …”Michelle’s voice trailed off as she stared at Sean.“Are you thinking what I’m thinking?” she said in a barely audible tone.“Yes, and I’m also thinking how big an idiot I am for not seeing it before.”They jumped in the truck.He checked his watch. “What about your plane ride with Champ?”“Postponed until tomorrow.”“Good, maybe by then you’ll change your mind. Call Horatio and tell him to meet us at Alicia’s cottage.”“Why?”“He’s a piano player, that’s why.”Simple Genius
