---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_067.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["michelle", "thing", "said", "water", "camp", "river", "little", "kayak", "thought", "whitfield", "side", "man", "go", "peary", "got", "time", "could", "life", "boat", "looked", "around", "ian", "york", "hear", "knew"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit067html

---


Unknown
Chapter 67Michelle, naturally always drawn to the water, decided to go kayaking. It helped her think and she wanted to take another pass by Camp Peary’s river frontage. If they were going to try to break into the place at some point, a little extra reconnoitering couldn’t hurt. When she got down to the boathouse she saw her kayak on the pier.How did that get here? she wondered.After a half–hour on the water she’d scrutinized the camp from several different angles. The chain link fence wouldn’t be difficult to get past, but after that? For the first time she really thought about what would happen to them if they were caught. And what could they really expect to find amid thousands of acres of mostly undeveloped, forested land? Was that enough to give up her life for? And while it seemed that Sean was having second thoughts, what if he changed his mind and decided to go through with it? Would she stick by him or do the only logical thing and decline? And if he went by himself and was killed, when her presence might have made the difference? Could she live with herself?These thoughts were interrupted when a boat’s horn sounded nearby. She looked around. The RIB was puttering up to her from behind. Ian Whitfield was at the helm dressed in camie pants and a white T–shirt that revealed his chiseled physique. He was wearing a Yankees ball cap and a friendly expression.He expertly drew the boat alongside her kayak and then shifted the throttle to neutral, as she slipped her paddle over the RIB’s gunwale to hold her craft steady.“Ian Whitfield,” he announced, throwing up a hand in greeting.Michelle tried to hide her surprise.“Much nicer day to be out than yesterday,” he said cheerfully.“So you were out in the storm?”“A little. I found that kayak you’re sitting in floating downriver. Anything happen?”“A friend of mine took a dunk in the water. We finally got her out.”“Good thing. The York’s current can be a little tricky, Miss, uh?”“Michelle Maxwell. Just call me Michelle.” She glanced across the river. “So how are things on the other side of the York?”“Don’t recall saying I was from any side of the river.”“Just things you hear. And I hear more than most. I used to be with the Secret Service. But I’m sure you already knew that.”He continued to gaze out over the water. “My dream was to play shortstop for the Yankees, but the talent wasn’t up to the dream. Serving your country wasn’t a bad second option.”Michelle was a little taken aback by this tacit admission of the man’s employment. “Riding on Air Force One and protecting the Man was one of the greatest honors of my life.” She paused and added, “I knew some guys in Delta who were in Vietnam.” He gave her a penetrating stare. “Like I said, I hear more than most.”He shrugged. “That was a long time ago.”“But you never forget.”“Some do; I never have.” He pointed to Babbage Town. “So how goes it on your side of the river?”“Slowly.”“I often wondered why they set up shop down here.”“You mean across from you?”“You’ve got a partner here with you?” he said, ignoring her question.“Yes.”“Monk Turing’s death was unfortunate, but hardly the basis for a murder investigation.”“You told my partner it was a suicide.”“No, I told him there had been four other suicides in and around Camp Peary. And I also told him that the FBI had concluded that Turing killed himself.”“I’m not sure they still believe that. And then there’s Len Rivest.”“The local paper said he’d had a lot to drink and was found drowned in his bathtub. Doesn’t sound all that sinister really.”“Two deaths so close together?”“People die all the time in all different ways, Michelle.”He looked, Michelle thought, like a man who knew what he was talking about.“That almost sounds like a warning,” she said.“I have no control over how you interpret my words.” He swept his hand toward the other side of the river. “There’s a big federal presence down here and that includes the Navy. People working for their country, doing dangerous things, risking their lives. You should understand that. You risked your life for your country.”“I do understand it,” Michelle said. “And where exactly is this conversation going?”“Just keep in mind that this stretch of the York can be very dangerous. Whatever you do, don’t lose sight of that. You have a nice day now.”Michelle slipped her paddle off the gunwale as Whitfield put the throttle in reverse, turned and slowly puttered off. Michelle maneuvered her kayak so that she could continue to watch him as he headed downriver to the Camp Peary boat dock. The man never once looked back.When he was out of sight Michelle turned around and paddled slowly away. Ian Whitfield had given her a lot to think about. And a good reason to be afraid.Simple Genius
