---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_039.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["michelle", "judy", "intelligence", "camp", "peary", "okay", "new", "know", "like", "along", "would", "said", "training", "around", "want", "year", "going", "money", "go", "center", "secret", "force", "come", "talking", "official"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit039html

---


Unknown
Chapter 39Michelle took advantage of the drive down to call a girlfriend of hers who worked at the National Intelligence Center after a stint at the Secret Service where Michelle had helped her along the career path. She called the woman at home figuring her phone at work would be monitored.After a bit of chitchat, Michelle said, “Not looking for any secrets, Judy, but what can you tell me about Camp Peary?”“You mean the DOD’s Armed Forces Experimental Training Activity?”“Come on, Judy, give me a break. We’re talking CIA.”“Okay, okay, forgive the automatic official response.” Her friend gave her the physical dimensions of the place, a thumbnail of its history and its official mission. “Most of the advanced training is now done at the Point in North Carolina,” Judy said. “But it’s still the CIA’s primary Field Tradecraft center. Actually, the Pentagon’s thinking about establishing its own espionage school and setting up intelligence op commands around the world.”“Sometimes too much intelligence is a bad thing,” Michelle said wryly.Judy laughed. “I officially can’t comment on that. Now the current head of Camp Peary is a man named Ian Whitfield. Ex–military, Delta Force, I believe. Vietnam War hero. Not a guy you want to mess around with. He came over to the intelligence side sometime in the 1980s. He was stationed in the Middle East for the last several years. Now that he’s back stateside, word is he’s doing all he can to bring Camp Peary back to prominence.”“How’s he going about that?”“What’s your interest?”“Got a job down there. Someone was found dead on the property.”“I read about that in the newspaper. I thought it was a suicide.”“It might turn out to be. We were talking about Whitfield?”“Well, two years ago some money was slipped through Congress to construct a new building down there, purportedly a dormitory.”“Purportedly?”“Look, you didn’t hear this from me.”“Judy, I never talked to you, okay? Now spill it.”“In the Nineties they built a 105–room dorm to go along with a new training school. So, word around here is the new money was really for an interrogation center.”“Interrogation? Why would that be so hush–hush?”“Depends on who they’re interrogating and —”Michelle finished for her. “And how they’re interrogating them.”“Exactly.”“Terrorists?”“You know the NSA is probably listening to this conversation.”“Let them. They don’t have enough personnel to sift through the real bad guys’ conversations much less people like you and me. So they’re bringing people down there that nobody knows about and maybe torturing them?”“Officially? Absolutely not. Unofficially, who knows? It’s not like we’re going to be telling everyone that a brand–new torture chamber has opened in Tidewater, Virginia, three hours from the capital of the free world. I’m not for mistreating prisoners, but it’s a war on terror. It’s not like we can fight it the old–fashioned way.”“Okay, how are they getting them there?”“Along with the funds for the ‘dorm,’ money was also appropriated for a new runway that would accept larger jets.”“Like jets capable of intercontinental travel?”“Exactly.”Michelle was quiet for a few moments. “The paramilitary squads still assigned to Camp Peary?”“I can’t say.”“Judy, come on!”“Let me put it this way, don’t go there for a picnic, you might never be seen again.”“I appreciate it. You’ve been a big help.”“You’re the only reason I survived my first year with the Service.”“Girls do have to stick together.”“Are you working on this with Sean King?”“Yep.”“So are you two more than just business partners yet?”“Why do you want to know?”“Because if you’re not going after him I want a shot. He’s gorgeous.”“You ought to see him when he’s cranky.”“I’ll take him cranky, believe me.”Michelle clicked off, downed a PowerBar and finished off her coffee. She checked her watch and then her navigation system. Ninety miles an hour and sixty minutes to go. Trusty old illegal radar detector.Simple Genius
