---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_069.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["valerie", "sean", "really", "want", "back", "took", "whitfield", "think", "know", "go", "wife", "ian", "would", "said", "tell", "along", "beach", "sand", "husband", "take", "oh", "like", "bar", "people", "look"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit069html

---


Unknown
Chapter 69They were walking along the beach. Valerie carried her sandals while Sean slouched guiltily along, his head bowed, his loafers quickly filling up with sand. He had called Valerie because he couldn’t think of another promising line of investigation, and because of her husband’s conversation with Michelle. However, she’d pounced on him as soon as he’d stepped out of his car. She knew all about Sean Carter, including that his real name was Sean King.“I take it you’ve talked to your husband?” he said.“Oh yes! If there’s one thing old Ian is really good at it’s finding out stuff. You’re ex–Secret Service and you’re down here investigating those murders at Babbage Town. I can’t believe I fell for your lines. I really can’t believe it.”“Valerie, it wasn’t exactly like that.”She whirled on him. “Are you denying you used me to try and get information on my husband? Are you denying that you didn’t follow me to that bar after Ian told you to back off?”“No, I don’t deny that. But —”“Then there are no buts.”“Yes I was fishing for information, but I was just doing my job.”“What you did was unforgivable.”“Valerie. I’m sorry if it hurt you. But when you’re trying to find out how people were murdered … If I’d had any other way of getting info I would have.”She stared up at him, her arms folded across her chest, her sandals in the sand where she had dropped them. The ocean breeze whipped her white slacks against her legs. Slowly the look of fury on her face faded. “I guess I never expected it to happen to me. I never expected to be taken in. Not after Ian anyway.”“What do you mean?”“I mean I thought he married me because he loved me. I was obviously wrong about that.”“Why then?”“Who the hell knows? And then you come along and for the first time in my marriage I think, what would it be like to be with another man. You! You sonofabitch!”Sean stared uncomfortably at her. “Valerie, I can only say that it was very difficult for me to keep a professional distance.”“Professional distance! Oh, that makes me feel so loved.” Tears were sliding down her cheeks and she angrily wiped them away.“I’m sorry, Valerie. I really am.”“Just save the lies for someone else. I don’t need to hear them.”She stopped, stooped down, picked up a seashell and angrily flung it at a wave. She whirled around and grabbed his jacket with her hand. “And do you want to know the real kicker?”Sean’s expression showed that, no, he really didn’t want to know the kicker. Yet he said, “Tell me, I deserve it.”“Maybe you don’t.”“Valerie, if I could take it all back, I would, but I can’t. So just tell me.”Her gaze finally broke off from him, but only for a second. “I can’t tell you how much I want to go to bed with you. After all this shit. After everything you’ve done, used me, betrayed me. How much of a loser am I? How much! Because I want to screw your freaking brains out. What the hell does that say about me, Sean!”She started sobbing. He went to hold her but she pushed him away. He took her in his arms again and this time she let him hold her.A few minutes passed while the pair stood there, swaying in the sand together.Finally, Valerie pulled away, took a tissue from her pocket and wiped her eyes. “Look, can we just go somewhere a little more private than this. I … I mean …” She took a deep breath. “I should hate you, but I don’t. That first night in the bar when I blew you off, I left there thinking I was the biggest idiot in the world, because I could just sense there was far more to you.” She added quietly, “Far more than I ever saw in my marriage. So can we please just go somewhere?”“Sure, we can go somewhere, Valerie,” Sean said. He took her hand. “But it can’t be more than that. And I know this is going to sound crazy, but I don’t think you want it to be more than that either.”“Why?”“Because I think you’re still in love with your husband.”“This is really wonderful,” the voice said. “Really special.”They both looked up at the man as he walked toward them.“Oh my God!” Valerie hissed.Ian Whitfield limped across the sand.Sean stepped in front of Valerie. “This is not really what it looks like, Whitfield.”Whitfield stopped directly in front of Sean. “You don’t really want to go down that road, do you? Because bullshit lies might make me even more upset than I already am. And that would be quite an accomplishment, I can tell you.”“Ian, don’t!” Valerie said frantically.He didn’t even bother looking at her. “You had drinks with my wife, then you had dinner with her and now you’re walking on the beach holding hands. Are you suicidal or just stupid?”“And if you knew all of that, why am I still standing here? Why didn’t you have your goons take me out after the Mojito at the bar?” Sean took a step back and braced himself as the other man looked ready to start swinging.“I’m not the mob, King. I don’t have people whacked. I’m just a civil servant working for the American people.”“Okay, mister civil servant, piece of advice, work less and spend more time with your wife. The American people will understand.”Whitfield glanced over at Valerie, who shrank back. “So you’re a marriage counselor now? I thought you were just an incompetent private investigator.”“Just trying to do my job.”“Your job includes seducing my wife?”“I didn’t seduce your wife. And your wife keeps brushing me off because I think she loves you. Why, I don’t know. So maybe instead of playing the heavy with me, you and she might want to find some place private and talk it out. It’s up to you, big guy.”Whitfield took a step back. Sean glanced at Valerie. “You want me to stay?”She shook her head and mouthed the word, “No.”Sean looked back at Whitfield. “Don’t blow it.”Sean marched off leaving Whitfield and Valerie looking at each other as the beach wind swept over them.Simple Genius
