---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_012.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["michelle", "said", "think", "get", "want", "sandy", "like", "woman", "sean", "people", "never", "right", "tell", "say", "know", "sat", "okay", "big", "feel", "man", "let", "look", "back", "really", "one"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit012html

---


Unknown
Chapter 12While Sean was working on his investigation, Michelle was intent on beginning one of her own. In the cafeteria she took her tray and made her way over to the table where the woman in the wheelchair was having lunch. Michelle sat down beside her and opened her bottle of water. She glanced over at the lady.“I’m Michelle.”“Sandy,” the woman said. “What are you in for?”“I’m apparently suicidal,” Michelle said bluntly.The woman brightened. “So was I, for years, but you get over it. I mean I guess you do, unless you actually manage to kill yourself.”Michelle ran her gaze over the woman. She was in her late forties, long bottle blond hair meticulously styled, fine cheekbones, a pair of vibrant hazel eyes, and an ample bosom. Her makeup and fingernails were immaculate. Even though she was only wearing plain khaki pants, tennis shoes and a purple V–neck sweater, she carried it off with the confident air of a woman used to far more expensive things in life. Her voice had a Deep South foundation to it.“So what are you in for?” Michelle asked.“Depression, what else? My shrink says everybody’s depressed. But I don’t believe him. If everybody felt the way I did, well, I just don’t believe him, is all.”“You seem okay to me.”“I think I have a chemical imbalance. I mean that’s what everybody blames it on these days. But then like a snap, I just run out of energy. You seem okay too. Sure you’re not in here goldbricking?”“I’ve heard of goldbricking when you’ve been physically injured.”“People in lawsuits claiming emotional distress or mental trauma can help their case if they wind up in a place like this. You get a bed, three squares a day and all the meds you want. For some, that’s nirvana. Then their shrink testifies how they’ll never reach orgasm again or can’t leave their homes without fainting and, bam, they get a big, fat settlement.”“Quite a scam.”Sandy added, “Oh, I’m not saying lots of people aren’t legitimately screwed up, I happen to be one of them.”Michelle glanced at the woman’s legs. “Accident?”“I was shot in the spine by a nine–millimeter bullet fired from a Glock,” she said matter–of–factly. “Instant and irreversible paralysis and in a split second outgoing, athletic Sandy became a poor crip.”“My God,” Michelle exclaimed. “How’d that happen?”“I was in the wrong place at the wrong time.”“Is that why you were suicidal? Because you were paralyzed?”“The paralysis I could deal with. It was other crap that was hard to take,” she added mysteriously.“What other crap?” Michelle asked.“Not going there. You think you’re getting better?”Michelle shrugged. “I think it’s too early to say. Physically I feel okay.”“Well, you’re young and pretty, so once the bruises heal you’ll be fine to take control of your life.”“Take control of it how?”“Get yourself a man with money, and let him take care of you. Use your looks, honey, that’s why God gave them to you. And just remember this, title everything as joint tenants with right of survivorship. Don’t swallow the line that his money is his money bullshit.”“You sound like you speak from experience.”Sandy gave a shudder. “God I wish they let you smoke in here, but they say nicotine is an addictive substance. I say give me my cigs and get out of my damn face.”“But you want to be here, right?” Michelle asked.“Oh, we all want to be here, honey.” She smiled and slid two pieces of asparagus neatly into her mouth.Barry passed by, assisting a young man.Michelle nodded at him. “You know that attendant, Barry?”Sandy studied him for a moment. “I don’t know him, but it’s easy to tell that book by its cover.”“Where’s home for you?”“Definitely not where the heart is, sweetie. Now I’ve gotta go, I feel a migraine coming on and I don’t like people to see me that way. You might change your high opinion of old Sandy.”She quickly wheeled herself away, leaving Michelle staring at her food.After lunch, Michelle took a stroll that carried her by Sandy’s room. As she slowly walked by she glanced in the square cut of Plexiglas in the middle of the woman’s door. Sandy was lying asleep in her private room. Michelle continued on down the hall until she stopped at the locked door to the pharmacy. She glanced through the barred window and saw a short, balding man in a white coat dispensing a prescription. When he looked up and saw her she smiled. He turned his back to her and continued his work.“Okay, you’re off my Christmas card list,” Michelle said to herself.“Wandering again?” the voice said.Michelle turned quickly to see Barry staring at her.“What else is there to do?” she said.“I can think of a few things. Your face looks better. Getting those killer cheekbones back.”“Thanks,” she said curtly.“I saw you talking to Sandy at lunch today,” he remarked.“Nice lady.”“I’d watch out for her.”“Oh, you know her well?”“Let’s just say I know people like her. They can be trouble. You don’t want to get into trouble, right?”“I never go looking for trouble,” she lied.“Good girl,” he said condescendingly. “Look, if you ever need anything, don’t hesitate to ask.”“Anything like what?”He seemed both surprised and amused by her question.“Anything means anything.” Barry looked around and moved closer to her. “I mean I know it gets damn lonely in here for a hot babe like you.”“It never gets that lonely,” she said walking off. Sandy had definitely been right about that book’s cover.•    •    •Later that afternoon Horatio Barnes sat down across from Michelle.“No tape recorder today?” she observed.He tapped his head. “I took my vitamins today, so I’ve got it all up here. By the way, I talked to your brother.”Michelle sat forward, her look suddenly anxious. “How much did you tell him?”“Just enough to let him follow along.”“Did you tell him about the bar?”“Why would I tell him you went to a bar to get a drink and accidentally got in a fight with the Incredible Hulk.”“Stop screwing with me. Did you tell him?”“I was actually more interested in what he had to say about you.” He flipped back through his notebook. “He said you were a dynamo, with limitless energy and a drive that put everyone in the family to shame. A walking, talking tornado was his description. I’m sure he meant it with great affection.”“Bill has been known to exaggerate.”“I think he was entirely accurate. But he also said something else interesting.”“What was that?”“Care to guess?”“Look, who the hell’s playing games now. Just tell me!”“He said that when you were little you were as neat as a pin. Everything in its place. They used to make fun of you. But then, bam, complete personality change.”“What’s the big deal? I grew out of it. Now I’m a slob.”“You’re right; it does happen, but not usually overnight at age six. If you’d been a teenager I wouldn’t blink an eye. There’s a chromosome that goes haywire when you turn thirteen. It commands you to live in filth while withstanding all threats by parents to clean up your act. I’m just wondering what the reason was in your case because it happened long before that chromosome ordinarily flips out.”“It was a long time ago. Who cares?”“For our purposes the lapse of time doesn’t really matter. What does matter is what was going on in your head at that time.”“You know, we’ve never really even talked about my relationship with a man who killed a bunch of people. I’m not a shrink, but don’t you think that might be relevant as to why I’m so screwed up?”“Okay, let’s talk about him.”Michelle sat back and kneaded her fists into her thighs. “There’s not a lot to tell really. He was good–looking and kind, an accomplished artist and an amazing athlete with an interesting background. He made me feel good about myself. He was in a bad marriage and was trying to make the best of it.” She added sarcastically, “In fact his only negative was he just happened to be a mass murderer.”“And you can’t believe that you were so easily duped by such a man?”“It had never happened to me before?”“But also consider that serial killers are notorious for being great deceivers; it’s part of the psychological makeup that makes them who they are, and allows them to prey on their victims with such success. Ted Bundy is usually held up as the poster boy of that theory.”“Wow thanks, that makes me feel so much better.”“And because of that one incident you just chuck years of professional success and sound instincts? Do you think that’s reasonable?”“I don’t care if it’s reasonable, it’s how I feel.”“Do you think you loved him?”She pondered this. “I think maybe I could have, given time. And every time I think that, I want to slit my wrists. The bastard tried to kill me and would’ve if Sean hadn’t been there.”“Sean to the rescue. For which you were no doubt very grateful.”“Of course I was.”“I understand that while you were having your relationship, Sean was also seeing someone?”Michelle said dully, “He’s a big boy; he can do what he wants.”“But from what he said, that turned out to be a big mistake too.”“You bet it did.”“You think Sean’s a smart man?”“One of the smartest I’ve ever met.”“And yet he was deceived too.”“But he figured it all out. Me, I was still in la–la land.”“How did you feel about Sean and this woman?”“Like I said, he’s a big boy.”“That’s not what I asked you.”She snapped, “I felt bad about it, okay? Are you satisfied?”“Bad because he chose her over you?”Her eyes narrowed. “You don’t have a lot of tact, do you?”“We’ll assume that I don’t. But is that how you felt?”“I think I felt he was making a fool of himself.”“Why?”“She was a witch. Desperate to get her claws in him. And she was a murderer too though we could never prove it.”“So you suspected her of being a killer while Sean was seeing her?”Michelle hesitated. “No, I didn’t. There was just something about her that I didn’t like.”“So your instincts proved right with her.”Michelle sat back. “I guess so. I never thought about that really.”“Well, that’s why I’m here, to help you think of these things. And patients often contribute to the healing process perhaps without even knowing they are.”“How so?”“Like when you were in that bar. Part of you was looking for someone to hurt, to maybe even kill. Yet another part of you was looking for someone who could actually punish you, kill you. The result was you got the shit beat out of you, but you didn’t die, and I believe you had no real intention of doing so.”“How are you so sure?” she said mockingly.“Because people who really want to die use methods that are basically foolproof.” He ticked items off on his fingers. “A shotgun blast to the head, hanging, gas in the oven or poison down the throat. Those people don’t want help; they want to die and they almost always do. You didn’t die because you didn’t really want to.”“Suppose you’re right, now what?”“Now I want to talk about Michelle Maxwell as a six–year–old.”“You go to hell!” Michelle stalked out of the room and slammed the door behind her.Horatio screwed the top back on his pen and smiled contentedly. “Finally, we’re getting somewhere.”Simple Genius
