---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_029.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["alicia", "know", "could", "said", "len", "monk", "sean", "viggie", "going", "girl", "something", "anything", "rivest", "tell", "eye", "kill", "police", "back", "help", "never", "think", "death", "like", "babbage", "okay"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit029html

---


Unknown
Chapter 29Sean sat across from Alicia in her office in Hut Number One. She’d whisked him through the main area so fast that he’d only been able to see a large open area with lots of small desks and what was doubtless a genius at every one of them. He could almost smell the mental power of the folks working there along with the hum of multiple servers.He motioned to Alicia’s right leg and said in a joking tone, “You try and club me with that thing I’m going to lay you out.”She didn’t even crack a smile. “How did Len Rivest die? And don’t tell me it was a suicide.”He noticed that her eyes were red. “I don’t know how he died.”“How could you not know?”“Only the killer knows for sure. And considering that I didn’t kill him, I can only speculate as to the cause of death.”“All right, go ahead and speculate.”“I can’t do that. It’s an ongoing police investigation.”She snapped, “I can’t believe you’re falling back on that pathetic line.”“I used to be a cop and I know how leaks can screw up an investigation. The police are treating it as a suspicious death.”“But that could mean he was murdered or died accidentally?”He smiled. “Or it might be determined that he actually died from natural causes.”“You said someone killed him.”“And I could be wrong.”“Oh thank you for being such a big help,” she said.Sean leaned forward, his features no longer jocular. “The fact is I just met you and don’t know you from Eve. For all I know you could be the murderer.”“I didn’t kill anyone.”“I never met a murderer who said otherwise. That’s why we have defense lawyers.”“Do you think this is connected to Monk’s death?”“You must have missed my last point. Would you like me to repeat it?”Now Alicia sat forward. “Monk Turing’s last will and testament was discovered in his house last night. I was just told that in that will, Monk named me as his daughter’s guardian. I intend to carry that duty out to the fullest. If the girl’s in danger I want to know about it.”“Monk named you guardian, I didn’t think you two were that close.”“Monk knew that I cared about Viggie. Her well–being is my top priority.”“Well, with Rivest getting killed, Babbage Town doesn’t seem to be all that safe.”Alicia put a hand over her eyes and moaned, “Poor Len! Oh, God, I can’t believe he’s dead.”Sean sat back. “You seem to be taking Len’s death really hard. Any particular reason why?”She grabbed a tissue from a box on her desk and blew her nose. “Len and I were friends.”“Friends. Good friends, or something more?”“That’s none of your damn business.”“If you had a relationship with Len Rivest, it will be the business of the police to look into that.”“Okay, we were seeing each other, so what?”“Casual dating? Deeper than that? Wedding plans?”“You are an obnoxious prick!”“You’re obviously very smart, but apparently you can’t see that I’m preparing you for what the police and FBI will ask. You think Agent Ventris is going to go gentle on you? Dead man plus relationship equals you being a suspect.”“I didn’t kill him. Dammit I cared for him. He was a nice man. Maybe we had a future together. Now?” She turned away from him as tears trickled down her face.“Okay, Alicia, okay,” Sean said gently. “I know this is hard for you.” He paused. “Can you just tell me if Len mentioned anything to you about anyone wanting to hurt him? Or whether he knew anything that might endanger him? Something to do with Babbage Town? Camp Peary? Anything like that?”Alicia took several deep breaths and wiped her eyes with her sleeve before answering. “Camp Peary? What has that got to do with Len’s death?”“If Monk Turing’s death is connected to what happened to Len, maybe everything.”“But I thought you said it looked like Monk killed himself.”“We don’t know that for sure. But please answer my question, did Len mention anything to you?”“He never said anyone wanted to hurt him.”Sean leaned forward. “All right. How about spies here? He ever talk about that?”She shook her head. “No, never. Why?”“Just something he said to me. Anything else you can think of?”“Well, he did say that the people here had no idea what they were getting into. That what we were working on would change the world. And not in a good way.” She attempted a smile. “He said we geeks were clueless about how the real world worked. Maybe he was right.”“He mentioned to me that what was going on at Babbage Town was worth countries going to war for. It can’t be just numbers.”“I’m scared, Sean. Len Rivest was a very capable man. The fact that someone could kill him, like that, in his own house with security all around.” She shuddered and fell back in her chair.She looked so miserable that Sean rose and put an arm around her shoulders to steady her. “It’ll be okay, Alicia.”“Don’t patronize me! I’m terrified about Viggie. She could be in danger too.”“Why?” he asked.“You tell me. You’re the expert in this sort of thing.”“Does the girl know her father’s not coming back?”Alicia looked uncomfortable. “I’m trying to lay the groundwork to tell her, but it hasn’t been easy.”“If you’re really concerned about her, then I’d get her out of Babbage Town.”“I can’t do that.”“I thought Viggie’s welfare was your top priority?”“Viggie’s happy here. I can’t just uproot her and take the girl someplace she’s never been. It could destroy her.”“I’ll admit it’s not much of a choice.”“I have another option,” Alicia said suddenly, gripping his hand. “We stay and you help keep Viggie safe.”“I’ve already got a job.” I’ve actually got two jobs now, Sean mentally corrected.“She’s a child. She needs help. Are you just going to sit there and refuse to help a vulnerable little girl who just lost her father?”Sean started to say something and then stopped. Finally, he sighed. “I guess I could keep an eye on her.”Tears again trickled down Alicia’s cheeks. “Thank you.”“I guess now that I’m her unofficial bodyguard I should actually meet the young lady.”Alicia composed herself and rose. “She’s just finished doing some factoring exercises for me.”“What?”“Viggie has the ability to factor large numbers in her head. Not so large as to make my work obsolete, but there could be something lurking in the recesses of her mind that provides the key to unlocking the shortcut I’ve been looking for.”“And the vulnerable little girl brings the world as we know it to a screeching halt?”Alicia smiled. “Well, it’s said that the meek shall inherit the earth.”Simple Genius
