---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_035.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["champ", "two", "sean", "come", "go", "people", "know", "len", "hut", "let", "cleaning", "got", "number", "see", "look", "said", "laundry", "next", "dead", "always", "babbage", "really", "give", "one", "time"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit035html

---


Unknown
Chapter 35The next evening Sean was packing when someone knocked on his bedroom door.“Come in.”Champ Pollion poked his head through the door.“Did Alicia talk to you?” Sean asked.“About the move? Yes. I have no problem with you acting as Viggie’s guardian angel. I would just caution you not to end up dead,” he added firmly.“Self–preservation has always been high on my list of priorities.” Sean closed his bag and set it on the floor. “You know, we never got around to talking about what it is you do here at Babbage Town.”Champ came into the room. “I was really counting on Len to go through the details.”“Since Len can’t do the honors, care to give me the tour? I could take a stroll to Hut Number Two with you right now.”“So you know about Hut Number Two, do you?”“And I’m really curious about that gadget you had, the one that will make people forget about Edison and Bell?”“I have been known to give in to hyperbole from time to time.”“Why don’t you let me see for myself?”“Look, I don’t mean to be uncooperative —” Champ began.“Then don’t be,” Sean cut in.“There are confidences one has to keep,” Champ said loftily.“Let me explain the situation to you, Champ. First, I’m working with Sheriff Hayes on the case and he can compel you to show me if you force me to go down that road. Second, we’ve got two dead men tied to Babbage Town. I doubt you’d like to see it go to three, especially if you happen to be the third corpse.”“Me! You think I’m in danger?”“I know I’m in danger, so you sure as hell must be.”“Look, can’t this wait? I’m very busy.”“That’s what Len Rivest told me. And look where it got him.”Champ stiffened and then relaxed. “I don’t know; this is very awkward.”“It’s been my experience that uncooperative people have something to hide.”Champ’s face flushed. “I have nothing to hide.”“Good, so you won’t mind telling me where you were between the hours of midnight and two A.M. the night Len Rivest died?”“Is that when he was killed?”“Just answer the question.”“I don’t have to answer anything,” he said defiantly.“True. Call your lawyer, clamp your mouth shut and let the FBI investigate every detail of your life back to preschool. And if the Bureau is anything, it’s thorough.”Champ seemed to consider this for a few moments. “I couldn’t sleep so I went down to the hut to go over some test results.”“Anyone see you?”“Of course. There are always people working. We’re a 24/7 operation.”“So you were there the whole time? Twelve to two A.M? And beyond? Verified by witnesses.” Come on, Champ, tell me a lie. Come on.A sheen of perspiration rose on Champ’s forehead. “As best as I can recollect. You can’t hold me to the minute.”“I can’t but other people can and will. Now let’s go check out your hut.”On the way over Sean said, “Do you have a cleaning staff come in? Or do your folks do their own cleaning and laundry?”“The maids come in daily in several shifts. About two dozen cleaning personnel at a time.” He pointed up ahead where a woman in a white maid’s uniform was pushing a very full laundry cart down the pavement. “The laundry services are housed in part of Hut Number Three, next to the security headquarters. All the cleaning people have been vetted, wear the same uniforms and carry nontransferable IDs. Is that sufficient?”“No, it’s not. What type of detergent do they use?”Champ stopped walking and stared at him. “Excuse me?”“Just kidding, Champ, just kidding.”Simple Genius
