---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_074.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["sean", "said", "turned", "michelle", "want", "babbage", "town", "note", "computer", "viggie", "agent", "ventris", "girl", "going", "search", "left", "written", "guard", "gone", "would", "produced", "anyone", "horatio", "standing", "shit"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit074html

---


Unknown
Chapter 74Viggie was not on the river. All watercraft were accounted for. A search of Babbage Town had turned up nothing. The note that had been left with the teacher had been written on a computer. No one had seen who’d delivered the note.The guard that had been assigned to look after Viggie said he’d gone to the cottage that morning at a few minutes before eight, but there had been a note on the door inside the screen porch saying that Viggie was ill and would not be attending school that day. So he’d left. He produced the note. Like the other, it had been written on a computer and was untraceable.“So anyone could have done it,” Sean said. He, Michelle and Horatio were standing outside the grounds of Babbage Town. The psychologist had joined them in the search for Viggie. They had just scoured the area with Sheriff Hayes and a group of volunteers and turned up not a single clue as to what had happened to the girl.As they were standing there a black sedan pulled up.“Oh, shit,” Sean exclaimed. “Not him. Not now.”Special Agent Ventris climbed out of the car and walked over to them.“I understand you lost the girl. Again!”“What do you want, Ventris?” Sean demanded.“I want you to get out of here. Your presence here is counterproductive.”“What exactly have you produced? Other than confusion?”Michelle put a warning hand on Sean’s shoulder. “Just stay cool, he is a federal agent,” she muttered.“Better listen to your friend,” Ventris said, who’d overheard her warning. “If the girl has been kidnapped, we’ll find her. It’s a Bureau specialty.”“Would that be dead or alive?” Sean said bitterly.Ventris got back in his car and drove off as Sean stared angrily after him. “You son of a bitch,” he screamed after the departing FBI agent.Horatio said, “Okay, I think we all need to take a deep calming breath.”Sean snapped, “I don’t want to take a deep calming breath. I want to kick the shit out of Special my ass Agent Ventris.”“Okay, venting violent thoughts can be positive,” Horatio said awkwardly.All three turned their heads toward the road as a line of passenger buses rumbled up, stopped at the front gate and then were allowed through.Sean and Michelle hustled over to the guard stationed there. “What’s going on?”“We’re clearing out Babbage Town, at least for now.”“Why?” Michelle asked.“Two mysterious deaths and now a little girl’s gone missing. The people working here and their families are scared. They’re being transported to Williamsburg until things get cleared up.”“Who ordered this?” Sean demanded.“Actually, I did,” a voice said. They all turned to see Champ Pollion striding toward them. “Do you blame me?”“Can we stay?” Sean asked.“No! I’m not going to be responsible for anyone else getting hurt.”He turned to leave.“Where are you going?” Michelle asked.“I’m leaving too. Not even the discovery of quantum computers is worth my life.”Simple Genius
