---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_043.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["sean", "said", "one", "get", "len", "think", "joan", "thing", "right", "someone", "good", "know", "contract", "two", "went", "tell", "got", "telling", "back", "firm", "hired", "little", "established", "monk", "turing"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit043html

---


Unknown
Chapter 43Joan Dillinger screamed at him for a full two minutes, though it felt longer. She even played the guilt card.“I went out on a limb for you, Sean. And this, this is how you repay me?”“I didn’t return your calls because I didn’t have anything to report. What’s the big deal?”“I’ll tell you what the big deal is. My boss got a call from no one less than the DDO at Central Intelligence telling him in no uncertain terms that we better back the hell off, and he named you as one of the chief offenders. The Deputy Director of Operations for God’s sake!”“Ian Whitfield didn’t waste any time getting that done. I wonder how he knew your firm was on the case.”“They’re the CIA, Sean, they can find out things. Hell, half the people at my firm worked at Langley at some point.”“I can’t stop the police from investigating a murder, Joan.”“Oh and that’s another thing. So you’re telling me that you’re now affiliated with the police?”“It gets me into places I wouldn’t otherwise be able to, which increases the chances that I’ll find out the truth. Isn’t that what I’m supposed to be doing?”“Sean, when you were hired to do this job —”Interrupting, he said, “Yeah, let’s get that straight right now. Who hired us?”“Len Rivest.”“He’s only the head of security. Someone had to authorize him to hire your firm.”“Well, did you think of asking him?”“It doesn’t matter if I did or not now. He’s dead.”“What!”“He’s dead. I’m surprised the DDO failed to let that little tidbit slip.”“I can’t believe it. Len was a good guy. We went way back.”Sean said, “I’m sure you did; however, his status as a good guy has not been established in my mind.”“What do you mean by that?” she said sharply.“He was murdered, Joan. And in my experience people get murdered for one of two reasons. One, because someone didn’t like them. Two, because someone didn’t want them alive to talk.”“You think Len was involved in Monk Turing’s death?”“Murders so close together tend to be connected.”“It hasn’t been established that Monk was murdered.”“Technically, it hasn’t been established that Len was either, but I’m sure that he was. And by the way, someone took a couple of shots at me. I think they came from the vicinity of Camp Peary.”“Good God, all this happened and you never called me?”“I’ve been busy. So getting back to my original question: Who hired us?”“I don’t know.”“Joan, I’m tired and I’m totally pissed off at the world. So don’t play games with me. Len Rivest said, ‘countries would go to war’ for whatever they’re doing here.”“He said that?”“And you didn’t know?”“I didn’t. I swear, Sean. From the little I knew of the case, I figured you’d pull a few days down there and it would be concluded that Turing killed himself on Camp Peary grounds. It’s happened before, you know.”“Yeah, Ian Whitfield enlightened me on that point. But the dynamic has changed now with Rivest’s death.”“If they are connected.”“My gut tells me they are.”“Then I’m sending down reinforcements.”“I’ve already got someone.”There was a long pause and then Joan hissed. “Are you telling me that she’s down there with you?”“Who, Mildred?”“Michelle effing Maxwell!” she screamed so loudly that Sean had to pull the cell phone away from his ear.“That’s right,” he replied calmly. “She just showed up and reported for duty.”“She does not work for this firm.”“I know. I’m subcontracting the work out to her.”“You have no authority to do that.”“Actually, I do. I’m an independent contractor to your firm. In paragraph fifteen, subsection d of the contract I signed with your company it gives me the latitude to consult with assets that I deem appropriate to the task so long as payment for such assets comes out of my fees.”“You actually read the contract?”“I always read the contract, Joan. So maybe together we can get to the bottom of this thing. I’ve also got another friend coming down, a psychologist by the name of Horatio Barnes.”“Why? Or am I not entitled under the contract to question your choice of assets?”“Monk Turing’s young daughter,” he said simply. “She found out a little while ago that her father’s dead and went hysterical. And she’s also not so easy to communicate with on the best of days. But I think Horatio may be able to get through to her.”Apparently having resigned herself to these developments Joan said, “Do you think the girl may know something about her father’s death?”“Right now it’s one of the few leads we have.”“Sean, risking your life is not in the job description.”“I’ll keep that in mind.”“On the other hand, tell Mildred she’d look positively stunning eating a large–caliber bullet meant for you.”“Doubtless she already knows your feelings on the subject.”Sean put the phone down, collapsed back on his bed fully clothed and fell asleep. He had no concerns for his personal safety now. The A team was right across the hall. It was probably a good thing he couldn’t see how scared and confused his A team was. The man would not have slept nearly so soundly.Simple Genius
