---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "Simple Genius - index_split_061.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - Simple Genius"
tags: ["rose", "horatio", "car", "thought", "michelle", "think", "back", "said", "maxwell", "really", "hello", "mr", "hazel", "voice", "barnes", "remembered", "something", "right", "know", "help", "tell", "see", "home", "thanked", "b"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/SimpleGenius-indexsplit061html

---


Unknown
Chapter 61Horatio thanked Freeman and headed back to the B&B. When he got there Horatio checked messages at his office. There were quite a few, but only one really excited him. He quickly called her back.“Hello?”“Mrs. Rose? Hazel Rose?”“Hold on, she’s in the next bed.”Horatio waited a few moments as the sounds of the phone being passed over reached him. Then a deep, southern voice came on the line.“Hello? Who’s calling?”“Mrs. Rose. It’s Horatio Barnes. I just got your message.”“Oh, yes, Mr. Barnes. I wanted to thank you for what you did. They’re transferring me to that facility you talked about. I really can’t believe it. They actually have a library with real books in it instead of just magazines.”Horatio’s enthusiasm waned. He thought she’d remembered something about Michelle’s childhood. “Right. Absolutely. I’m glad it worked out for you. I know you’ll be much happier there. Thank you for calling.”“Now just hold your horses. That’s not the only reason I called.”Horatio immediately tensed. “It isn’t?”“I remembered something else. I don’t know if it’ll help you, but I thought I should pass it on.”“Right now, Mrs. Rose, I’ll take anything I can get.”Hazel Rose’s voice sank to a whisper, probably so her roommate couldn’t hear. “Remember I said that Frank Maxwell went to college at night to get a master’s degree so he could get onto a bigger police force?”“I remember. With Michelle’s brothers grown and gone by then, I’m sure it was pretty lonely for her.”“Well, I don’t think Michelle was the only lonely one in that house.”“What do you mean?”“You didn’t hear this from me.”“I swear. Now please tell me.”There was a long sigh and then she said, “Around about the time we were talking about, at least once a week I used to see a car parked down the road a bit from the Maxwell place.”“A car?”“I didn’t think much of it to tell the truth. And it was never there in the morning when my husband went off to work. I’d know because I’d be up to make his breakfast.”“You ever find out whose car it was?”“No. But I did see the car at another place once. It was parked outside a Dairy Queen.”“Did you see who was driving it?”“Yep. A good–looking man. He was in uniform.”“What kind of uniform?”“Army.”“Was there a military base nearby?”“No, but there was a recruitment station in town.”“So you think he worked there?”“Maybe. I never followed it up. It really wasn’t my business.”“But why do you think the car had something to do with the Maxwells’ house?”“Back then it was the only house down that way other than mine. And the only other homes on the street were occupied by women whose husbands were home at night.”“And Frank Maxwell wasn’t?”“That’s right. And the nights he was home, that car wasn’t there.”“You’re sure?”“Absolutely.”“And you just thought of this?” he said skeptically.“I thought of it while you were here. But why rake up muck? What good will it do?”“What made you change your mind then?”“The more I thought about it, the more I believe the truth, whatever it is, might help Michelle. She was just a little girl. Whatever might have happened back then it wasn’t her fault.”“And what do you think happened, Mrs. Rose?”“Mr. Barnes, that I just won’t say. It’s up to you now. I hope this helps. Did you tell Michelle I said hello?”“I did and she remembered you very well.”Hazel Rose’s voice cracked slightly. “I wish nothing but the best for that girl.”Horatio thanked her, hung up and slumped back in his chair. This put a whole new spin on everything that the psychologist didn’t like at all.Simple Genius
