---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "The Collectors - Collectors_chap_21.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - The Collectors"
tags: ["caleb", "stone", "said", "looked", "book", "well", "jonathan", "philip", "would", "know", "milton", "friend", "see", "gas", "paper", "vault", "one", "janklow", "hemingway", "halon", "could", "right", "reuben", "asked", "library"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/TheCollectors-collectorschap21html

---

the collectors
CHAPTER 21THE CAMEL CLUB HELD A hastily called meeting at Stone’s cottage at the cemetery the morning following their visit to DeHaven’s home. Stone explained to Milton and Caleb in greater detail what had happened the night before.“They could be watching us right now,” a frightened Caleb said as he glanced out the window.“I would be astonished if they weren’t,” Stone replied calmly.His cottage was small and sparsely furnished: an old bed, a large, beaten-up desk covered with papers and journals, shelves of books in various languages, all of which Stone spoke, a small kitchen with a battered table, a tiny bathroom and a scattering of mismatched chairs arranged around the large fireplace that was the cottage’s main source of heat.“And that doesn’t concern you?” Milton asked.“It would have concerned me much more had they tried to kill me, which they easily could have despite Reuben’s heroics.”“So what now?” Reuben asked. He stood in front of the fireplace, trying to work the chill off. He checked his watch. “I need to get to work.”Caleb added, “So do I.”Stone said, “Caleb, I need to get inside the vault at the library. Is that possible?”Caleb looked uncertain. “Well, under normal conditions it would be. I mean, I have the authority to take people into the vaults, but I’ll be questioned as to why. They don’t really like people just bringing in friends and family without advance notice. And with Jonathan’s death restrictions are even tighter.”“What if the visitor was a scholar from overseas?” Stone asked.“Well, of course, that’s different.” He glanced at Stone. “What foreign scholar do you know?”Reuben broke in. “I think he’s talking about himself, Caleb.”Caleb looked sternly at his friend. “Oliver! I cannot possibly assist in perpetrating a fraud on the Library of Congress, for God’s sake.”“Desperate times call for desperate measures. I believe we are now the targets of some very dangerous people because we’re involved with Jonathan DeHaven. So we need to find out whether his death was natural or not. And looking at the place where he died may help me determine that.”“Well, we know how he died,” Caleb countered. The others looked at him in surprise. “I just found out this morning,” he said quickly. “A friend from the library called me at home. Jonathan died as the result of cardiopulmonary arrest, that’s what the autopsy reported.”Milton said, “That’s what everybody dies of. It just means your heart stopped.”Stone looked thoughtful. “Milton’s right. And that also means the medical examiner doesn’t know what actually killed DeHaven.” He stood and looked down at Caleb. “I want to go into the vault this morning.”“Oliver, you can’t just show up unannounced as some scholar.”“Why not?”“It’s just not done. There are protocols, procedures to follow.”“I’ll say I was in town for a visit with family and wanted very much to see the world’s greatest collection of books; a spur-of-the-moment thing.”“Well, that might work,” Caleb grudgingly conceded. “But what if they ask you some question you don’t know the answer to?”“There’s no one easier to impersonate than a scholar, Caleb,” Stone assured him. Caleb looked very offended at this remark, but Stone disregarded his friend’s annoyance and added, “I’ll be at the library at eleven o’clock.” He wrote something on a piece of paper and handed it to Caleb. “This is who I’ll be.”Caleb glanced down at the paper and then looked up in surprise.With that, the meeting of the Camel Club was adjourned, although Stone took Milton aside and started talking to him quietly.A few hours later at the library Caleb was handing a book to Norman Janklow, an elderly man and reading room regular.“Here it is, Norman.” He handed him a copy of Ernest Hemingway’s A Farewell to Arms. Janklow was a Hemingway fanatic. The novel he was holding was a first edition, inscribed by Hemingway.“I would die to own this book, Caleb,” Janklow said.“I know, Norman, me too.” A signed Hemingway first edition would fetch at least $35,000, Caleb knew, certainly beyond his financial means and probably Janklow’s too. “But at least you can hold it.”“I’m getting started on my biography of Ernest.”“That’s great.” Actually, Janklow had been “getting started” on his Hemingway biography for the last two years. Still, the notion seemed to make him happy, and Caleb was more than willing to play along.Janklow carefully fingered the volume. “They’ve repaired the cover,” he said irritably.“That’s right. Many of our first-edition American masterpieces were housed in less-than-ideal conditions before the Rare Books Division really got up to speed. We’ve been going through the backlog for years now. That copy was long overdue for restoration, an administrative error, I guess. That happens when you have nearly a million volumes under one roof.”“I wish they’d keep them in their original condition.”“Well, our chief goal is preservation. That’s why we have this book for you to enjoy, because it’s been preserved.”“I met Hemingway once.”“I remember you telling me.” Over a hundred times.“He was a piece of work. We got drunk together at a café in Cuba.”“Right. I remember the story very well. I’ll let you get to your research.”Janklow slipped on his reading glasses, took out his pieces of paper and a pencil and lost himself in the adventurous world of Ernest Hemingway’s prodigious imagination and spare prose.Promptly at eleven o’clock Oliver Stone arrived at the Rare Books reading room dressed in a rumpled three-piece tweed suit and holding a cane. His white hair was neatly combed, and he sported a very trim beard along with large black glasses that made his eyes buglike. That coupled with his walking with a stoop made him appear twenty years older than he was. Caleb rose from his desk at the back of the room, hardly recognizing his friend.As one of the attendants at the front desk approached Stone, Caleb hurried forward. “I’ll take care of him, Dorothy. I . . . I know the gentleman.”Stone made an elaborate show of producing a white business card. “As promised, Herr Shaw, I am here to see the books.” His accent was thick and Germanic, and very well done.As Dorothy, the woman behind the front desk, looked at him curiously, Caleb said, “This is Dr. Aust. We met years ago at a book conference in . . . Frankfurt, was it?”“No, Mainz,” Stone corrected. “I remember very clearly, because it was the season of Spargel, the white asparagus, and I always go to the Mainz conference and eat the white asparagus.” He beamed at Dorothy, who smiled and went back to what she was doing.Another man came into the reading room and stopped. “Caleb, I wanted to talk to you for a minute.”Caleb turned a shade paler. “Oh, hello, Kevin. Kevin, this is, uh, Dr. Aust from Germany. Dr. Aust, Kevin Philips. He’s the acting director of the Rare Books Division. After Jonathan’s—”“Ah, yes, the very untimely death of Herr DeHaven,” Stone said. “Very sad. Very sad.”“You knew Jonathan?” Philips said.“Only by reputation. I think it clear that his paper on James Logan’s metrical translation of Cato’s Moral Distichs was the final word on the subject, don’t you?”Philips looked chagrined. “I must confess I haven’t read it.”“An analysis of Logan’s first translation from the classics to be produced in North America, it is well worth exploring,” Stone advised kindly.Philips said, “I’ll be sure to add it to my list. Ironically, sometimes librarians don’t have a lot of time to read.”“Then I will not burden you with copies of my books,” Stone said with a smile. “They’re in German anyway,” he added with a chuckle.“I invited Dr. Aust to take a tour of the vaults while he’s in town,” Caleb explained. “Sort of a spur-of-the-moment thing.”“Absolutely,” Philips said. “We’d be honored.” He lowered his voice. “Caleb, you heard the report about Jonathan?”“Yes, I did.”“So that means he just had a heart attack, then?”Caleb glanced at Stone, who, out of Philips’ line of sight, gave a slight nod.“Yes, I think that’s exactly what it means.”Philips shook his head. “God, he was younger than me. It gives one pause, doesn’t it?” He looked over at Stone. “Dr. Aust, would you like me to give you the fifty-cent tour?”Stone smiled and leaned heavily on his cane. “No, Herr Philips, I would much prefer you to take that time and begin your friend’s paper on Moral Distichs.”Philips chuckled. “It’s good to see that distinguished scholars can retain a healthy sense of humor.”“I try, sir, I try,” Stone said with a slow bow.After Philips had left them, Caleb and Stone headed into the vault.“How did you find out about Jonathan’s scholarly work?” Caleb asked once they were alone.“I asked Milton to dig around. He located it on the Internet and brought me a copy. I scanned it in case someone like Philips showed up, to prove my scholarly pedigree.” Caleb looked disgruntled. “What’s the matter?” Stone asked.“Well, it’s a little deflating to one’s ego to see how easily a scholar can be impersonated.”“I’m sure your validation of my pedigree made all the difference to your boss.”Caleb brightened. “Well, I’m sure it contributed somewhat to the success,” he said modestly.“All right, take me through your exact movements that day.”Caleb did so, ending on the top floor. He pointed at a spot. “That’s where his body was.” Caleb shivered. “God, it really was terrible.”Stone looked around and then stopped and pointed at something on the wall.“What’s that?”Caleb looked to where he was pointing. “Oh, that’s a nozzle for the fire suppressant system.”“You use water in here with all these books?”“Oh, no. It’s a halon 1301 system.”“Halon 1301?” Stone asked.“It’s a gas, although it’s really a liquid, but when it shoots out of the nozzle, it turns to gas. It smothers the fire without damaging the books.”Stone looked excited. “Smothers! My God!” His friend looked at him curiously. “Caleb, don’t you see?”What Stone was referring to suddenly dawned on Caleb. “Smothering? Oh, no, Oliver, no. It couldn’t have been the cause of Jonathan’s death.”“Why not?”“Because a person would have several minutes to escape the area before he’d start feeling the effects. That’s why they use halon in occupied places. And before the gas is discharged, a warning horn comes on. We’re changing systems actually but not because it’s dangerous.”“Why, then?”“Halon significantly depletes the ozone layer. In fact, while it can still be used in this country and recycled for new applications, the manufacture of halon 1301 is banned in the U.S. and has been since the mid-nineties. Although the federal government is still the biggest user of it.”“You seem to know a lot about halon.”“Well, all employees were given an in-depth review of the system when it was first installed. And I did some extra reading on the subject.”“Why?”He blurted out, “Because I come into this vault a lot, and I didn’t want to die a horrible death! You know I lack any shred of personal courage.”Stone examined the nozzle. “Where’s the gas stored?”“Somewhere in the basement level of the building, and the gas is piped up here.”“You say it’s stored as liquid and then comes out as a gas?”“Yes. The speed with which it’s blown out of the nozzle turns it into a gas.”“It must be very cold.”“If you’re standing in front of the nozzle, you could get frostbite, in fact.”“Anything else?”“Well, if you stay in the room long enough, I suppose you could be asphyxiated. The rough rule of thumb is if there’s not enough oxygen for a fire, there’s not enough oxygen to sustain life.”“Could the gas cause a heart attack?”“I don’t know. But it doesn’t matter. The system never came on. That horn can be heard throughout the building. The only way Jonathan wouldn’t have heard it is if he was already dead.”“What if the horn was disconnected?”“Who would have done that?” Caleb said skeptically.“I don’t know.”While he was talking, Stone was staring at a large register built onto one of the columns supporting a bookshelf. “Is that a vent for the HVAC system?” he asked. Caleb nodded. “Something must have fallen on it,” Stone said, pointing to where two of the vent grilles had been bent.“It happens with people bringing book carts in and out.”Stone said, “I’ll have Milton research the halon system and see if anything else turns up. And Reuben has some friends at D.C. Homicide and the FBI from his days in military intelligence. I’ve asked Reuben to call them to see if he can find out something about the investigation.”“We have the meeting with Vincent Pearl tonight at Jonathan’s house. In light of these developments, don’t you think it best to call it off?”Stone shook his head. “No. Those men can find us wherever we are, Caleb. If we’re in danger, I’d rather try to find out the truth for myself than sit back and wait for the blow to fall.”As they were leaving the vault, Caleb muttered, “Why couldn’t I have just joined a nice, boring book club?”