---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "The Collectors - Collectors_chap_13.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - The Collectors"
tags: ["caleb", "book", "stone", "said", "reuben", "one", "milton", "jonathan", "collection", "vault", "rare", "psalm", "door", "room", "could", "house", "looked", "would", "great", "safe", "turned", "like", "library", "man", "number"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/TheCollectors-collectorschap13html

---

the collectors
CHAPTER 13THAT EVENING REUBEN AND Stone drove to DeHaven’s house on the Indian motorcycle, the tall Stone crammed into the sidecar. Caleb and Milton pulled up right behind them in Caleb’s ancient and sagging pewter-gray Chevy Nova with a finicky tailpipe. Caleb was wearing his backup pair of glasses; he assumed he’d be reading a lot tonight.“Nice digs,” Reuben said as he tugged off his helmet and goggles and looked at the massive house. “Pretty ritzy for a government salary.”“Jonathan came from money,” Caleb answered.“Must be nice,” Reuben said. “All I ever came from was trouble. And that’s also where I always seem to be headed with you mates.”Caleb unlocked the front door, turned off the alarm system, and they all stepped inside. He said, “I’ve been in the vault before. We can take the elevator down to the basement level.”“Elevator!” Milton exclaimed. “I don’t like elevators.”“Then you can walk down the stairs,” Caleb advised, pointing to the left. “They’re over there.”Reuben looked around at the antique furniture, tasteful artwork on the walls and sculptures in classically styled presentation niches. He rubbed the toe of his boot on the beautiful Oriental rug in the living room. “Do they need a house sitter until everything’s settled?”Caleb said, “That would be a no.”They rode the elevator down and met Milton in a small anteroom.The vault door was a monster, two-foot-thick steel with a computerized keypad and a slit for the special security key. The key and combo had to be inputted at the same time, Caleb told them. “Jonathan let me go in the vault with him on several occasions.”The door slid open on silent powered hinges, and they went inside. The space was about ten feet wide, nine feet high, and looked to be about thirty feet long. As soon as they walked in the vault, specialized low lighting came on, enabling them to see reasonably well.“It’s fire- and bombproof. And it’s also temperature-and-humidity-controlled,” Caleb explained. “That’s a must with rare books, particularly in basements, where those levels can fluctuate drastically.”The vault was lined with shelves. And on the shelves were books, pamphlets and other articles that, even to the untrained eye, looked rare and valuable.“Can we touch anything?” Milton asked“Better let me do it,” Caleb answered. “Some of these items are very fragile. Many of them haven’t seen natural light for over a hundred years.”“Damn,” Reuben exclaimed, running his finger lightly along the spine of one of the books. “Like a little prison and they’re serving their life sentences.”“That’s a very unfair way to look at it, Reuben,” Caleb said in a scolding tone. “It protects the books so other generations can one day enjoy them. Jonathan went to great expense to house his collection with exquisite care.”“What sort of collection did he have?” Stone asked. He was eyeing one very old tome whose cover appeared to be carved from oak.Caleb carefully slid out the book Stone was referring to. “Jonathan had a good collection, but not a great one; he’d be the first to admit that. All the great collectors had an almost limitless amount of money, but, more than that, they all had a vision for what sort of collection they wanted and they pursued it with a single-mindedness that could only be called an obsession. It’s referred to as bibliomania, the world’s ‘gentlest’ obsession. All the great collectors had it.”He glanced around the room. “There are some must-haves for the best collections that Jonathan simply would never be able to own.”“Like what?” Stone asked.“Shakespeare’s Folios. The First Folio would be the obvious one, of course. It contains nine hundred pages with thirty-six of the plays. None of the Bard’s original manuscripts have survived, so the Folios are incredibly desirable. A First Folio sold a few years ago in England for three and a half million pounds.”Milton let out a low whistle and shook his head. “About six thousand dollars a page.”Caleb continued, “Then there are the obvious acquisitions: William Blake, Newton’s Principia Mathematica, something from Caxton, the earliest English printer. J. P. Morgan had over sixty Caxtons in his collection, if I remember correctly. A 1457 Mainz Psalter, The Book of St. Albans, and, of course, a Gutenberg Bible. There are only three known mint-condition Gutenbergs printed on vellum in the world. The Library of Congress has one. They’re priceless.”Caleb ran his gaze down one shelf. “Jonathan has the 1472 edition of Dante’s Divine Comedy, which would be welcome in any first-rate collection. He also has Poe’s Tamerlane, which is exceedingly rare and difficult to obtain. One sold some time ago for nearly two hundred thousand dollars. Poe’s reputation has made a nice rebound lately, so today it would fetch a much higher price. The collection includes a worthy selection of incunabula, mostly German, but some Italian, and a solid set of first editions of more contemporary novels, many of them autographed. He was very strong in Americana and has a large sampling of personal writings from Washington, Adams, Jefferson, Franklin, Madison, Hamilton, Lincoln and others. As I said, it’s a very nice collection, but not a great one.”“What’s that?” Reuben asked, pointing to a dimly lit corner in the back of the vault.They all crowded around the object. It was a small portrait of a man in medieval dress.“I don’t remember seeing that before,” Caleb said.“And why have a painting hanging in a vault?” Milton added.“And only one painting,” Stone commented. “Not much of a collection.” He was examining the portrait from various angles before placing his fingers on one edge of the painting’s frame and pulling. It swung open on a set of hinges, revealing the door of a small combination lock safe built into the wall.“A safe within a safe,” Stone said. “Try the combination the lawyer gave you for the main vault, Caleb.”Caleb did so but it didn’t work. He tried various other numbers without success.Stone remarked, “People typically use a combination they won’t forget so they won’t have to write it down. It could be numbers, letters or both.”“Why give Caleb the key and pass code to the main vault but not give him the one to the inner safe?” Milton asked.“Maybe he figured Caleb would know it somehow,” Reuben commented.Stone nodded. “I agree with Reuben. Think, Caleb. It might have something to do with the Rare Books reading room.”“Why?” Milton asked.“Because this was DeHaven’s rare books reading room of sorts.”Caleb looked thoughtful. “Well, Jonathan did open the room every day, about an hour before anyone else arrived. That was done with special alarmed keys, and he also had to input a security code to open the doors. But I don’t have that code.”“Something simpler than that perhaps. So simple it’s staring you in the face.”Caleb suddenly snapped his fingers. “Of course. Staring me in the face every day of my life.” His fingers punched in a code on the safe’s digital pad, and the door clicked open.“What number did you use?” Stone asked.“LJ239. It’s the room number of the Rare Books reading room. I look at it every day when I go to work.”Inside the safe was one article. Caleb carefully drew out the box and slowly opened it.Reuben said, “That thing’s in pretty ragged shape.”It was a book, the cover was black and torn and the binding was starting to come apart. Caleb carefully opened it and turned to the first page. Then he turned another and then another.He finally gave a sharp intake of breath. “Oh, my God!”Stone said, “Caleb, what is it?”Caleb’s hands were shaking. He spoke slowly, his voice trembling. “I think, I mean I believe this is a first-edition Bay Psalm Book.”“Is it rare?” Stone asked.Caleb looked at him wide-eyed. “It’s the oldest surviving object printed in what is now the United States, Oliver. There are only eleven Psalm Books in existence in the entire world, and only five of them are complete. They never come onto the market. The Library of Congress has one, but it was given to us decades ago. I don’t believe we could’ve afforded it otherwise.”“So how did Jonathan DeHaven get one?” Stone remarked.With great reverence Caleb carefully eased the book back into the box and closed it. He placed the box in the safe and shut the door. “I don’t know. The last Psalm Book came on the market over sixty years ago when it was purchased for what was then a record amount equaling millions of dollars in today’s money. It’s now at Yale.” He shook his head. “For book collectors this is like finding a missing Rembrandt or Goya.”“Well, if there are only eleven in the world, it would be pretty simple to account for them,” Milton suggested. “I could Google it.”Caleb looked at him with disdain. While Milton embraced every new advance of the computer, Caleb was a decided technophobe.“You can’t just Google a Psalm Book, Milton. And as far as I know, all of them are in institutions like Harvard, Yale and the Library of Congress.”“You’re sure it’s an original Psalm Book?” Stone asked.“There were numerous subsequent editions, but I’m almost certain it’s the 1640 version. It said so on the title page and has other points of the original that I’m familiar with,” Caleb breathlessly replied.“What exactly is it?” Reuben asked. “I could barely read any of the words.”“It’s a hymnal that the Puritans commissioned a number of ministers to put together to give them religious enlightenment on a daily basis. The printing process was very primitive back then, which, coupled with the old-style spelling and script, makes it difficult to read.”“But if all the Psalm Books are in institutions?” Stone said.Caleb glanced at him, a look of trepidation on his face. “I guess there’s the possibility, however rare, that there are unaccounted-for Psalm Books out there. I mean, someone found half of the handwritten manuscript for Huckleberry Finn in her attic. And someone else turned up an original copy of the Declaration of Independence behind a picture in a frame, and then there was the discovery of some of Byron’s writings in an old book. Over hundreds of years anything’s possible.”Though the room was cool, Caleb wiped away a bead of perspiration from his forehead. “Do you know the enormous responsibility this entails? We’re talking about a collection with a Psalm Book in it. A Psalm Book, for God’s sake!”Stone put a calming hand on his friend’s shoulder. “I’ve never met anyone better qualified to do this than you, Caleb. And whatever we can do to help, we will.”“Yeah,” Reuben said. “In fact, I’ve got a few bucks on me if you want to get a couple books out of the way before the real heavyweights start circling. What’ll you take for that Divine Comedy thing? I could use a few laughs.”Milton piped in, “Reuben, none of us could even afford to buy the auction catalog they’ll print the collection in.”“Well, that’s just great,” Reuben exclaimed in mock fury. “Now, I guess the next thing you’ll tell me is I can’t quit my crappy job at the loading dock.”“What the hell are you people doing here!” a voice cried out.They all turned to look at the intruders who were standing just outside the vault door. There were two burly men in the uniforms of private security, their guns pointed at the Camel Club. The man in front of the two guards was short and thin with a shock of red hair, a trim beard of matching color and a pair of active blue eyes.“I said what are you people doing here?” the redhead repeated.Reuben growled, “Maybe we should be asking you the same thing, buddy.”Caleb stepped forward. “I’m Caleb Shaw with the Library of Congress, where I worked with Jonathan DeHaven. In his will he appointed me as his literary executor.” He held up the house and vault keys. “I was given permission from Jonathan’s lawyer to come here and look over the collection. My friends came along to help me.” He reached in his pocket and presented his library ID to the man, whose demeanor quickly changed.“Of course, of course, I’m sorry,” the man said after gazing at Caleb’s ID before handing it back to him. “I just saw people entering Jonathan’s house, and the door was unlocked, and I suppose I jumped to conclusions.” He nodded to his men to put away their guns.“We never did catch your name,” Reuben said, eyeing the man suspiciously.Before he could answer, Stone said, “I believe we’re in the company of Cornelius Behan, CEO of Paradigm Technologies, the country’s third largest defense contractor.”Behan smiled. “Soon to be number one if I get my way, and I usually do.”“Well, Mr. Behan,” Caleb began.“Call me CB, everybody does.” He took a step forward and glanced around the room. “So this is DeHaven’s book collection.”“You knew Jonathan?” Caleb asked.“I wouldn’t call us friends, really. I had him over for one or two holiday parties. I knew he worked at the library and that he collected books. We’d occasionally pass each other on the street and chitchat. I was very stunned to hear of his death.”“As we all were,” Caleb added somberly.“So you’re his literary executor, you said,” Behan noted. “What does that mean?”“It means I’ve been given the task of cataloging and appraising the collection and then selling it.”“Anything good in here?” Behan asked.“Are you a collector?” Stone inquired.“Oh, I’ve been known to collect a good many things,” he answered vaguely.“Well, it is a very good collection. It will be put up for auction,” Caleb explained. “At least the most prominent parts of it will be.”“Right,” Behan said absently. “Any new developments on Jonathan’s death?”Caleb shook his head. “So far it appears to be a heart attack.”“And he seemed so healthy. I guess that’s a good reason to give it all we’ve got every day, because tomorrow . . . ?” He wheeled around and marched out, his men scurrying along in his wake.As the sounds of the footsteps faded, Stone turned to Caleb. “Very considerate of him to come and check on the house of a man he occasionally chitchatted with.”“He was his neighbor, Oliver,” Caleb pointed out. “He’s naturally concerned.”“I didn’t like him,” Milton said. “He builds things that kill people.”“Lots of people,” Reuben added. “In my book old CB’s a shifty little peckerhead.”They spent hours going over the books and other articles until Caleb had a fairly complete list. Milton inputted these onto his laptop computer.“Now what?” Milton asked as they closed the last book.“Ordinarily, you’d bring in an appraiser from Sotheby’s or Christie’s,” Caleb answered. “But I have someone else in mind. And in my opinion he’s the best there is in the rare book field. And I want to find out if he knew that Jonathan had the Psalm Book.”“Is he in New York?” Stone asked.“No, right here in D.C. Maybe twenty minutes by car.”“Who is it?” Reuben asked.“Vincent Pearl.”Stone checked his watch. “We’ll have to see him tomorrow, then. It’s already eleven o’clock.”Caleb shook his head. “Oh, no, now is perfect. Vincent Pearl’s rare book shop is only open at night.”