---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "The Collectors - Collectors_chap_57.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - The Collectors"
tags: ["stone", "trent", "house", "man", "annabelle", "one", "let", "place", "behind", "see", "phone", "said", "window", "seagraves", "black", "next", "probably", "another", "home", "around", "point", "minute", "front", "far", "back"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/TheCollectors-collectorschap57html

---

the collectors
CHAPTER 57ALBERT TRENT LIVED IN AN OLD house with a broad front porch set far back from a rural road in western Fairfax County.“Must be a hike for him to get into D.C. every day from here,” Stone noted as he eyeballed the place with a pair of binoculars from behind a copse of towering river birch. Annabelle, dressed in black jeans, dark tennis shoes and a black hooded jacket, crouched next to him. Stone carried a small knapsack.“Does it look occupied?” she asked.He shook his head. “No lights that I can see from here, but the garage is closed, so we can’t tell if there’s a car in there.”“A guy in the intelligence field probably has an alarm system.”Stone nodded. “I would be stunned if he didn’t. We’ll disable that first, before we go inside.”“You know how to do that?”“As I once told Reuben when he asked me that, the library is open to everyone.”There wasn’t another house within their line of sight, but they still approached the rear of the house to avoid being seen. This required crawling on their bellies, then their knees, and finally crab-walking down a gentle slope twenty yards from the house. They halted here and Stone took another reconnoiter. The home had a walk-out basement with a pressure-treated deck on one end. The back was as dark as the front. With no streetlights and just a dash of ambient light, Stone’s night binoculars were working optimally. Through the green haze of the coated optics he could see everything he needed to.“I’m not spotting any movement, but make the call anyway,” he told Annabelle.Milton had gotten Trent’s home phone number off the Internet, a far more dangerous threat to America’s privacy than the poor National Security Agency ever thought of being. Annabelle used her cell phone to call. After four rings the voice mail kicked in, and they listened to a man’s voice instructing them to leave a message.“Our spy seems to be out in the cold tonight,” she said. “Are you armed?”“I don’t own a gun. You?”She shook her head. “I’m not into that. I go for brains over bullets.”“Good, guns aren’t great things to be into.”“You sound like you speak from experience.”“Now is not the time to swap life stories.”“I know, I’m just foreshadowing for when will be a good time.”“I didn’t think you’d be sticking around after this.”“I didn’t think I’d be sticking around for this. So you never know.”“Okay, the phone box is hanging on a foundation wall underneath the deck. Let’s move, keep it nice and slow.”As they crawled forward, a horse whinnied somewhere in the distance. There were small family farms scattered around here, though they were being rapidly ground under by northern Virginia’s colossal residential housing machine that randomly spit out condos, town houses, modest single-family homes and mansions with numbing speed. They’d passed several such farms on the way to Trent’s place, all of which had stalls, hay bales, paddocks and large critters nibbling grass. Fat piles of horse manure left on the streets had served as an exclamation point for the equines’ presence. Stone had almost stepped in some getting out of Annabelle’s rental car.They reached the phone box, and Stone spent five minutes evaluating the security system hardwired into it, and took another five minutes to disable it. After he’d rerouted the last wire, he said, “Let’s try the window right here. The doors probably have dead bolts. I brought a tool to force them, but let’s take the point of least resistance first.”That point was not the window, which was nailed shut.They moved down the rear of the house and finally found one window that was secured with window pins. Stone cut a circle of glass out, reached in, pulled out the pins and popped the lock. A minute later they were roaming down the hallway toward what looked to be the kitchen, with Stone in the lead holding a flashlight.“Nice place, but he appears to be a minimalist,” Annabelle noted. Trent’s taste in interior decoration did tend toward the spartan: a chair here, a table there. The kitchen was barren.Stone said, “He’s a bachelor. He probably eats out a lot.”“Where do you want to start?”“Let’s see if he has an office of some kind here. Most D.C. bureaucrats tend to bring their work home.”They found the office, but it was nearly as bare as the rest of the house, no papers or files. There were some photos on the credenza behind the desk. Stone pointed to one. A big, bearish man with a bluff, honest face, white hair and thick gray eyebrows was standing next to a smaller, flabby man with a bad comb-over but who possessed a pair of cagey brown eyes and a furtive expression.Stone said, “The big man is Bob Bradley. Trent’s next to him.”“Trent looks like a little weasel.” She stiffened. “What’s that vibrating sound?”“Damn, that’s my phone.” Stone unclipped his cell and looked at the screen. “It’s Caleb. I wonder what they found.”He never got a chance to hear.The heavy blow from behind knocked Stone unconscious.Annabelle let out a scream an instant before a wet cloth held by a very strong hand covered her mouth and nose. As she breathed in the chemical fumes and started to collapse, her gaze fell on a mirror hanging on a wall across the room. In the reflection she could see two men wearing black masks. One had her, and the other was standing over Stone. And behind them she saw a third man. It was the man in the picture, Albert Trent. He smiled, not realizing she had seen his reflection. Within a few moments her eyelids started fluttering, then closed, and she became limp.In accordance with Roger Seagraves’ instructions, one of the men removed the watch from Annabelle’s wrist. Seagraves already had a shirt of Stone’s. Although he was not killing them himself, Seagraves was orchestrating their deaths, which satisfied his collection criteria. He would especially covet the addition of a Triple Six, a first for his collection. Seagraves intended on giving it a particularly special place of honor.