---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "The Collectors - Collectors_chap_7.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - The Collectors"
tags: ["stone", "caleb", "reuben", "milton", "year", "eye", "worked", "oliver", "looked", "friend", "book", "well", "said", "think", "heart", "know", "around", "club", "made", "national", "mental", "come", "get", "rare", "died"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/TheCollectors-collectorschap7html

---

the collectors
CHAPTER 7CALEB SHAW LAY IN A HOSPITAL bed slowly shaking his head. Around him were the other members of the Camel Club. Reuben Rhodes was nearly sixty years old, over six foot four with the build of a football lineman. He had curly black hair that touched his shoulders and brooding eyes and an unkempt beard that made him appear quite mad at times; which, on occasion, was nearer the truth than not. Milton Farb was five-eleven and thin with longish hair and a cherubic, unlined face that made him look much younger than his forty-nine years.Reuben was a much-decorated Vietnam War vet and former Defense Intelligence Agency employee, who currently worked at a loading dock after his military career had been derailed by booze, pills and his outrage over the war that he’d indiscreetly vented. He dried out with the help of Oliver Stone, who’d happened upon him at Arlington National Cemetery where Reuben had been unceremoniously lying stoned under a maple tree.Milton had been a child prodigy of boundless intellectual ability. His parents had worked in a traveling carnival where their son’s mental prowess was exploited in a freak show atmosphere. Despite that, he had gone to college and been employed at the National Institutes of Health. However, suffering from obsessive-compulsive disorder and other destructive mental ailments, his world had eventually come crashing down around him. He became destitute and fell into such debilitated mental shape that a court ordered him institutionalized.Again Oliver Stone came to the rescue. He’d worked as an orderly at the psychiatric hospital where Milton had been a patient. Recognizing the man’s remarkable abilities, which included a pure photographic memory, Stone managed to get a sedated Milton on Jeopardy! where he defeated all comers and earned a small fortune. Years of dedicated counseling and drug therapies had allowed him to live quite normally. He now had a lucrative business designing Web sites for corporations.Stone leaned his six-foot-two-inch body against a wall, his arms crossed in front of him as he looked down at his friend in the bed.Possessing twin doctorates in political science and eighteenth-century literature, Caleb Shaw had worked at the Library of Congress’ Rare Books reading room for over a decade. Unmarried and childless, the library, aside from his friends, constituted the passion of his life.Caleb had run into some hard times as well. He’d lost an older brother in Vietnam, and his parents had died tragically in a plane crash over fifteen years ago. Stone had met Caleb at the depths of his despair, when the librarian had seemingly lost his desire to keep going. Stone befriended him, introduced him to a bookstore owner in desperate need of help, and Caleb was gradually drawn out of his depression by his love of books. I seem to collect hopeless cases, Stone thought to himself. Though I used to be one myself. Indeed, Stone owed as much to his friends as they did to him, if not more. But for Caleb, Reuben and Milton, Stone knew, he wouldn’t have survived either. After years of performing only destructive acts, Stone had spent the last thirty years of his life seeking a measure of personal redemption. By his count, he still had a long way to go.Stone’s musings were interrupted by the entrance of Alex Ford, a veteran Secret Service agent who’d played an instrumental role in helping the Camel Club in the past and been named an honorary member of the club for his heroics.Ford stayed for half an hour and was relieved to find that Caleb would be okay.He said, “Take care of yourself, Caleb. And call me if you need anything.”“How are things at WFO?” Stone asked him, referring to the Service’s Washington Field Office.“Way too busy. The criminal elements have kicked it into overdrive.”“Well, I hope you’ve recovered fully from our little adventure.”“I don’t call a potential global apocalypse a little adventure. And I don’t think I’ll ever fully recover.”After Alex Ford had left, Caleb turned to the others. “It was truly horrible,” he said. “There he was just lying on the floor.”“And you fainted?” Stone asked, his gaze fixed on his friend.“I must have. I remember turning the corner, looking for my sweater, and there he was. God, I almost stumbled over him. I saw his eyes. My mind went blank. My chest tightened. I felt so cold. I thought I was having a heart attack. And then I just passed out.”Reuben put a hand on Caleb’s shoulder. “A lot of people would’ve fainted.”Milton piped in, “The National Psychiatric Foundation reports that finding a dead body ranks as the second most traumatic event a human being can experience.”Reuben raised his eyebrows at this comment. He said, “What’s the number one traumatic experience? Finding your spouse in bed with a monkey holding a can of expired Cheez Whiz?”“Did you know DeHaven well?” Stone asked Caleb.“Yes. It’s tragic, really. He was in excellent shape. He’d just had a complete cardio workup at Hopkins. But I guess anyone can have a heart attack.”“Is that what it was, a heart attack?” Stone said.Caleb looked uncertain. “What else could it be? Or a stroke perhaps?”“Statistically speaking, it was probably a heart attack,” Milton added. “It’s the leading cause of so-called instant death in this country. In fact, any of us could drop at any moment and be dead before we hit the floor.”“Damn, Milton,” Reuben retorted, “do you have to be so bloody cheerful?”“Until the autopsy results come back we can only speculate,” Stone pointed out. “But you didn’t see anyone else in the vault area, did you?”Caleb stared up at his friend. “No.”“But you passed out pretty quickly, so you wouldn’t have necessarily noticed anyone else around on the fourth floor?”“Oliver, you can’t get in the vault without using your pass card. And there’s a camera right there at the main door.”Stone looked thoughtful. “First, the Speaker of the House is murdered, and now the director of the Rare Books Division dies under somewhat mysterious circumstances.”Reuben eyed him warily. “I doubt terrorists are targeting book peddlers these days, so don’t work this into another grand conspiracy with the fate of the world in the balance. I can only take one Armageddon per month, thank you very much.”Stone’s eyes twinkled. “We’ll table the issue for now until we know more.”“I can give you a ride home, Caleb,” Reuben said. “I have my motorcycle.”Reuben’s pride was his fully restored 1928 Indian motorcycle with the very rare left-hand sidecar.“I don’t think I’m up to that, Reuben.” Caleb paused and added, “Frankly, that contraption of yours terrifies me.”A nurse bustled in, took the patient’s vitals and stuck a temperature reader in Caleb’s left ear.“Can I go home soon?” he asked.She took the reader out and looked at it. “You’re almost up to normal. And yes, I think the doctor is preparing the discharge orders now.”As arrangements were made for Caleb’s release, Stone drew Reuben aside.“Let’s keep an eye on Caleb for a while.”“Why? You think he’s really hurt?”“I don’t want him to get hurt.”“The guy died from a coronary, Oliver. It happens every day.”“But probably not for someone who’d just been given a clean bill of health by Johns Hopkins.”“Okay, so he popped a blood vessel or fell and cracked his skull. You heard Caleb: The guy was all alone in there.”“As far as Caleb knows, he was, but he couldn’t possibly know for sure.”“But the security camera and the pass card,” Reuben protested.“All good points, and they may very well confirm that Jonathan DeHaven was alone when he died. But that still doesn’t prove he wasn’t killed.”“Come on, who’d have a grudge against a librarian?” Reuben asked.“Everyone has enemies. The only difference is for some people you just have to look harder to find them.”