---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "The Collectors - Collectors_chap_55.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - The Collectors"
tags: ["caleb", "would", "stone", "book", "said", "vault", "glass", "one", "milton", "know", "tell", "hour", "reuben", "think", "annabelle", "chemical", "time", "thought", "oliver", "looked", "english", "access", "go", "see", "well"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/TheCollectors-collectorschap55html

---

the collectors
CHAPTER 55STONE PUT ON THE GLASSES AND flipped through the book. He ran his finger across one of the letters he knew had been highlighted earlier. It was as dull and lifeless as the others now. He closed the book, took off the glasses and sighed. “The highlighting chemical wash they used had a time limit built in. Then it evaporates.”“Like vanishing ink?” Milton said.“Somewhat more sophisticated than that,” Stone said. He added in anger, “I should have thought of that.”“Do you know about this sort of chemical, Oliver?” Caleb asked.“Not this process, no. But it would make sense. If you’re a spy and it’s possible that the glasses might fall into the wrong hands, the book will reveal nothing if enough time passes.” He looked at Caleb. “Whoever put the chemical wash on had to know that Jewell English would have access to the book before the effect wore off. How could that be accomplished?”Caleb thought for a moment. “Someone would have to go into the vault and doctor the book there. Then contact her somehow and tell her which one to ask for. She comes to the library right away and asks to see it.”Stone studied the cover of the book. “It seems that it would be quite a tedious process to mark each appropriate letter. If nothing else, it would take some time.”“Well, people are in and out of the vaults fairly frequently. But some of the interior vaults don’t see a lot of use. However, if one of the library staff were in there for hours on end, it would be noticed, certainly.”Reuben said, “Maybe whoever did it is really good, can do it quickly, maybe using some sort of template.”“What about after hours?” Stone asked.Caleb looked uncertain. “In the vault? That would be limited to a very few. The director and the Librarian of Congress are the only two I can think of. The computer is programmed to deny access to other people after hours unless special arrangements have been made. It certainly wouldn’t be an everyday thing.”“So DeHaven would’ve had access to the vault after hours?” Stone said.Caleb nodded slowly. “Yes, he would. Do you think he was part of the spy ring? And that’s why he was killed?”Annabelle started to protest, then seemed to think better of it.“I don’t know, Caleb.” Stone rose. “What we need to do now is act. Caleb, call Jewell English and tell her you’ve found her glasses where she dropped them in the reading room. Tell her you’ll bring them by to her.”“Tonight? It’s already nine o’clock,” Caleb said.“You have to try! It’s clear to me that we’re operating on a very tight time frame now. And if she’s made a run for it, we need to know.”Annabelle said, “Oliver, that might be dangerous. What if she’s still around and suspects something’s up?”“Caleb will wear a listening device. I know that Milton has some of those gadgets at his home.” Milton nodded. Stone continued, “Milton will go with him to English’s but remain hidden outside. If something happens, he can call the police.”“What if the something that happens is bodily harm to me?” Caleb whined.“You described her as an elderly lady, Caleb,” Stone reminded him. “I think you should be able to handle the situation. However, I believe the more likely scenario is that you’ll find she’s gone. If so, try to get into her house and discover what you can.”Caleb was squeezing his hands nervously. “But what if she hasn’t left? And what if she has some big thug around who attacks me when I go to see her?”Stone shrugged. “Well, of course, that would be unfortunate.”The librarian turned crimson. “Unfortunate? That’s easy for you to say. Pray tell what will you be doing while I’m risking my life?”“Breaking into Albert Trent’s home.” He glanced at Annabelle. “Are you game?”“Oh, absolutely,” Annabelle said, smiling broadly.“What about me, Oliver?” Reuben said pitifully. “I thought I was your Tonto.”Stone shook his head. “You’ve been arrested once and you’re still a suspect, Reuben. We can’t risk it. You’ll have to sit this one out, I’m afraid.”“Well, that’s just great,” Reuben grumbled, slapping his thigh in frustration. “Some people get all the fun.”Caleb looked ready to strangle the big man.