---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "The Collectors - Collectors_chap_63.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - The Collectors"
tags: ["stone", "man", "trent", "would", "back", "tomorrow", "get", "time", "long", "like", "oliver", "sat", "people", "call", "going", "albert", "want", "know", "one", "reuben", "annabelle", "went", "chair", "coffee", "added"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/TheCollectors-collectorschap63html

---

the collectors
CHAPTER 63THE CALL CAME AT PRECISELY ten o’clock. Stone and the rest of the group were in a downtown hotel suite. The man on the other end started to dictate the time and place to meet, but Stone cut him off.“We’re not going to do that. We have Albert Trent. You want him back, then we’ll do an exchange on our terms.”“That is not acceptable,” the voice said.“Fine, then we turn your buddy over to the CIA and they can ‘coax’ the truth out of him, including naming names, and believe me, what I’ve seen of Trent, it won’t take long. You won’t even have time to pack a bag before the FBI knocks down your door.”“Do you want your friend to die?” the man snapped.“I’m telling you how they both can live, and you can avoid going to prison for the rest of your life.”“How do we know this isn’t a trick?”“How do I know you’re not planning to put a bullet into me when I show up? Simple, we have to trust each other.”There was a long pause. “Where?”Stone told him where and when.“Do you realize what tomorrow will be like down there?”“That’s why I picked it. We’ll see you at noon. And one more thing: If you harm Caleb, I will kill you personally.” Stone clicked off and turned to the others.Milton looked fearful but determined. Reuben was examining the contents of the leather pack Alex Ford had given them. Annabelle’s gaze was directly on Stone.Stone went over to Reuben. “How’s it look?”He held up two syringes and two bottles of liquid. “Amazing stuff, Oliver. What will they think of next?”Stone walked into the adjoining room, where an unconscious Albert Trent was strapped to the bed. Stone stood there, fighting a strong impulse to attack the sleeping man who’d caused them all such pain.A minute later he rejoined the others. “Tomorrow will be a long day, so we need to get some sleep. We’ll run two-hour shifts watching Trent. I’ll take the first one.”Milton immediately curled up on the couch while Reuben lay down on one of the double beds. Both men were asleep within a few minutes. Stone went back into the other room, sat down in a chair next to Trent and stared at the floor. He jerked when Annabelle pulled up a chair beside his and handed him a cup of coffee she’d made. She was still dressed in jeans and a sweater, but her feet were bare. She curled one long leg under her as she sat down.He thanked her for the coffee and added, “You should get some sleep.”“I’m more of a night person, actually.” She glanced at Trent. “So what are the odds of everything going perfectly tomorrow?”“Zero,” Stone answered. “It’s always zero. Then you do all you can to beat that number, but sometimes it’s out of your hands.”“You speak from experience, don’t you?”“What else do you speak from?”“Bullshit, like most people, but not you.”He sipped his coffee and stared off. “Alex Ford is a good man. I’d go into battle with him anytime. I have, in fact. We actually have a decent shot at doing this clean.”“I want to kill that little creep,” she said, watching the unconscious Trent.Stone nodded and ran his gaze over the man. “He looks like a mouse, a desk jockey, which is exactly what he is, to most people. Wouldn’t hurt a fly. He just gets other people to do it for him, and this cruelty has no limit because he doesn’t have to see it or dirty his hands. Because of people like him, our country has been put at great risk.”“All for money?”“I’ve known some to claim it was about a cause, about following their beliefs, even about the excitement, but it’s always really about the money.”She eyed him curiously. “You’ve known other traitors?”He glanced sideways at her. “Why do you find any of this interesting?”“I find you interesting.” When he remained silent, she said, “We were talking about other traitors?”He shrugged. “I’ve known more of them than I cared to. But I didn’t know them for long.” He rose and went over to the window. “In fact, most of them I only saw for a few seconds before they died,” he added barely in a whisper.“Is that what you were? The assassin of American traitors?” Stone’s shoulders tensed and she added hurriedly, “I’m sorry, John, I shouldn’t have said that.”He turned to face her. “I guess I failed to mention that John Carr is dead. So why don’t you make it ‘Oliver’ from now on?” He sat back down without looking at her. “I really think you need to get some sleep.”As she rose to leave, she glanced back. Stone sat rigid in the chair seemingly staring at Albert Trent, but Annabelle didn’t believe the man was looking at the handcuffed spy. His thoughts were probably far in the past, perhaps recollecting how to give a bad man a quick death.Not that far away Roger Seagraves was marshaling his own team, trying to anticipate every move the other side would make. He hadn’t been back to his house because he’d suspected something had happened to Trent. He and his partner had implemented a system whereby each would call the other by a certain time in the evening if everything was okay. He obviously hadn’t gotten that call. Their capturing Trent complicated matters but didn’t make things insurmountable. He had to assume that Oliver Stone and the others had gone to the authorities by now, so there were several levels of opposition he would have to bust through to get Trent clear, if the man hadn’t already ratted him out. However, rather than fearing tomorrow, Seagraves was looking forward to it. It was such times that the man lived for. And it was only the best man that would survive. And Seagraves was certain he would be that man tomorrow. Just as certain as he was that Oliver Stone and his friends would be dead.