---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "The Collectors - Collectors_chap_51.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - The Collectors"
tags: ["seagraves", "trent", "know", "got", "one", "would", "guy", "albert", "secret", "business", "said", "thing", "think", "room", "man", "good", "program", "roger", "file", "put", "okay", "shaw", "going", "need", "also"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/TheCollectors-collectorschap51html

---

the collectors
CHAPTER 51ALBERT TRENT AND ROGER Seagraves were meeting in Trent’s office on Capitol Hill. Seagraves had just handed Trent a file with some briefing material. Trent would make a copy of the file and put it in the committee’s intake system. Embedded within the original file were critical secrets from the Pentagon detailing U.S. military strategies in Afghanistan, Iraq and Iran. Trent would use a pre-agreed decryption method to ease these secrets from the pages. With this business finished, Seagraves said, “Got a minute?”They strolled around the Capitol grounds. “Boy, Roger, you got lucky with Behan, and the other guy getting blamed for it,” Trent said.“Understand one thing, Albert: Nothing I do is tied to luck. I saw an opportunity and took it.”“Okay, okay, no offense meant. You think the charges will stick?”“Doubtful. I’m not sure why he was there, but he was watching Behan’s house. And he’s buddies with Caleb Shaw at the reading room. And on top of that, the guy I nabbed and ‘talked’ to, this Oliver Stone, is with the same group.”“Shaw is DeHaven’s literary executor. That’s why he’s been going to the house.”Seagraves looked disdainfully at his colleague. “I know that, Albert. I did a face-to-face with Shaw to set up a future move if it becomes necessary. It’s not just books they have on their minds. The guy I interrogated used to be at CIA in a very special capacity.”Trent exclaimed, “You didn’t tell me that.”“You didn’t need to know, Albert. Now you do.”“Why do I need to know now?”“Because I said so.” Seagraves gazed at the Jefferson Building, where the Rare Books reading room was located. “These guys have also been snooping around Fire Control, Inc. My man there said the paint on one of the cylinders they pulled from the library had been rubbed off. So they probably know about the CO2.”Trent turned pale. “This is really not looking good, Roger.”“Don’t start sweating yet, Albert. I’ve got a plan. I’ve always got a plan. We got the last payment in. How fast can you move the new stuff?”He checked his watch. “Tomorrow at the earliest, but it’ll be tight.”“Make it happen.”“Roger, maybe we should just shut it down.”“We’ve got a lot of customers to service. That wouldn’t be good business.”“It also wouldn’t be good business to go to prison for treason.”“Oh, I’m not going to prison, Albert.”“You can’t know that for certain.”“Yes, I can. Because they don’t put dead men in jail.”“Okay, but we don’t have to go that route. Maybe we should think about at least slowing down a bit. Let things cool off.”“Things rarely cool down after they heat up. We’ll just keep doing what we’re doing, and like I said, I have a plan.”“Care to share it?”Seagraves ignored the question. “I’m doing another pickup tonight. And this one might top ten mil if it’s as good as I think it is. But keep your eyes and ears open. Anything looks strange, you know where to find me.”“You think you might have to, you know, kill again?”“Part of me sure hopes so.” Seagraves walked off.Later that night Seagraves drove to the Kennedy Center to attend a performance of the National Symphony Orchestra, NSO. Perched on the edge of the Potomac, the plain, boxy Kennedy Center had often been declared one of the country’s blandest memorials built in honor of a deceased president. Seagraves didn’t care about the aesthetics of the structure. He didn’t care about the NSO either. His handsome features and tall, muscular physique drew stares from many of the women he passed as he walked down the hall toward the auditorium where the NSO would be performing. He took no notice of this. Tonight was strictly a working night.Later, during the brief intermission, Seagraves joined other patrons in going outside the auditorium to get a drink and gaze over the memorabilia for sale. He also made a pit stop in one of the men’s rooms. After that, the lights dimmed, signaling the start of the last part of the program. In a crush of people he made his way back to the theater.An hour later he had a drink at a late night bar across from the Kennedy Center. He pulled his program out of his side jacket pocket and studied it. This was not his program, of course. It had been slipped into his pocket during the crush of the crowd getting back into the theater. There was no possibility that anyone could have seen this. Spies who skirted crowds were always caught. For that reason, Seagraves embraced the masses for the protective cover they provided.Back home in his workshop, Seagraves finessed the secrets from the pages of the “program” and put them in the proper format to send along to Albert Trent the next time he saw the man. He smiled. What he was staring at was no less than the final pieces he needed for the decryption keys for high-level diplomatic communications emanating from the State Department to its overseas branches. Now he was thinking $10 million was too cheap. Maybe $20 million. Then Seagraves decided he would start at $25 million to leave himself some wiggle room. He conducted all his negotiations over various prearranged Internet chat sites. And the secrets were only delivered once the money had been wired into his numbered account. He had taken the very reasonable position of not trusting anyone he did business with. Yet he was kept honest on his end by the efficiencies of the free market. The first time he collected money without delivering the merchandise, he would be out of business. And probably dead.The only possible thing that could upset that plan was some old guys who had a habit of snooping. If it had only been the librarian, he wouldn’t have been too worried. But thrown into the mix was the Triple Six, a man not to be taken lightly. Seagraves could sense another storm brewing. For that reason, when he’d earlier kidnapped Stone and tortured him, he’d taken one of his shirts from the man’s cottage; to add to his collection, if the need arose.