---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "The Collectors - Collectors_chap_36.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - The Collectors"
tags: ["stone", "caleb", "reuben", "said", "cylinder", "would", "looked", "jonathan", "one", "vault", "room", "door", "gas", "ductwork", "milton", "camera", "inside", "fire", "hvac", "grille", "behind", "men", "get", "found", "book"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/TheCollectors-collectorschap36html

---

the collectors
CHAPTER 36CALEB MANAGED TO GET STONE and Reuben through security on the strength of his credentials and the lie that they were important visitors looking at an exhibit after hours, although Caleb did so reluctantly and thus not very smoothly.As they took the elevator down to the basement, Caleb complained, “Well, I don’t feel all that different for having committed a felony!”“Oh, the felony’s coming up, Caleb,” Stone said, showing his friend the ring of special keys. “What you did back there was probably no more than a misdemeanor.” Caleb merely glared at him.They located the room, which had large double doors. Stone quickly found the key on his ring that would fit the lock. A moment later they were inside the spacious room. The fire suppression equipment was against one wall.“Now I see the reason for the large doors,” Stone said.The cylinders were huge, each probably weighing nearly a ton, and would not have fit through a regular-size door. Several of them were connected to pipes that ran to the ceiling and beyond.The labels on the cylinders all read “Halon 1301.” “Fire Control, Inc.,” Stone said, reading the name of the company that had installed the equipment, which was also printed on the cylinders. He next studied the piping configuration. “There’s a manual switch here to turn on the gas. And the pipes must run to a number of rooms in addition to the book vaults. But it’s not clear which cylinder would be running to your space, Caleb.”Reuben looked over Stone’s shoulders. “And you can’t really tell if they’ve been discharged or not.”Stone moved to the HVAC ductwork and pulled out the drawing Milton had done. He glanced at a section of ductwork that rose straight to the ceiling.“Why are you so interested in the HVAC, Oliver?” Reuben asked.“If some sort of gas was used to kill Jonathan, then the killer would have to know that he’d be at an exact spot before knowing when to turn on the gas line from down here.”Caleb said, “That’s right, I hadn’t thought about that. Since there was no fire to trigger the gas, it had to have been turned on manually. But to do that, you’d have to be in this room. So how could the killer know that Jonathan would even be in that part of the vault?”“I think he knew Jonathan’s daily pattern. He was always the first one in the vault, and he regularly visited certain areas while he was inside, including the place where he died.”Reuben shook his head. “Okay, but from what Caleb told us he found DeHaven’s body about twenty feet from one of the nozzles, meaning he was in the perfect place to be killed by the gas. But how would the person have known that all the way down here?”Stone looked at Milton’s drawing and then pointed to the HVAC. “This trunk line feeds directly into the book vault, running through all levels of it.”“So?”Stone was looking around the HVAC and then stopped. On the side not visible from the main area, Stone pointed at something. Reuben and Caleb looked at the spot.“Why would you have an access panel cut into the ductwork?” Reuben wanted to know.Stone opened the small panel and looked inside. “Caleb, remember the vent in the ductwork near where Jonathan’s body was found. The grille was bent?”“Yes, I remember you pointing that out. What about it?”“If someone placed a camera attached to a long cable inside the ductwork in the book vault and bent the grille open, the camera would have a clean shot of the vault area where Jonathan was that morning. And if someone was down here with a receiver attached by that cable to the camera, I believe he could see everything going on up there, including Jonathan’s movements.”“Damn,” Reuben said. “And they used the ductwork—”“Because that was the only way to run the cable. A wireless signal might not go through all the concrete and other obstructions,” Stone said. “I think if we examine the ductwork inside the vault behind that bent grille, we’ll note some evidence of how the camera was hung. The person waits down here, sees Jonathan on the camera and hits the manual switch, having disconnected the warning horn beforehand, and in ten seconds the gas is fully dispersed and Jonathan dies.”“But whoever did it would certainly have gone to retrieve the camera, so why didn’t he bend the grille back then?” Reuben asked.“He might have tried, but once you start bending those grilles, it’s hard to get them back perfectly.” He looked at Caleb. “Are you all right?”Caleb was ashen-faced. “If what you’re saying is true, then someone working at the library killed Jonathan. No one else could’ve entered the book vault unaccompanied.”“What the hell’s that?” Reuben hissed.Alarmed, Stone looked at the door. “Someone’s coming. Quick, behind here.”They scrambled behind the HVAC system, Reuben having to half carry the terrified Caleb. They had barely gotten out of sight before the double doors opened. Four men came in, all wearing blue jumpsuits. Right behind them a forklift sailed into the room, driven by a fifth man. Another, obviously the boss, held a clipboard as the others gathered around him.“Okay, we’re taking this one, this one and that one,” he said, pointing at three cylinders, including two attached to the piping. “And replacing them with the three on the forklift,” he added.The men went to work carefully unhooking the enormous pressurized cylinders from the pipes while Stone and the others watched from their hiding place.Reuben glanced at Stone, who shook his head and put a finger to his lips. Caleb was shaking so badly that Stone grabbed one of his arms and Reuben the other to try and steady him.A half hour later the three cylinders were lifted up by the forklift and strapped on. Next the three cylinders the men had brought in were attached to the piping system. Then the forklift moved out of the room, with the other men trailing. As soon as the doors closed behind the men, Stone went over to the newly installed cylinders and read the labels. “FM-200. Caleb, you said the library was scrapping the halon system. They must be replacing it with this type of fire suppressant.”“I suppose,” Caleb replied.“Okay, we’ve got to follow them,” Stone said.Caleb whimpered, “Please, Oliver, no.”“Caleb, we have to.”“I . . . don’t . . . want to die!”Stone shook him hard. “Get ahold of yourself, Caleb. Right now!”Caleb looked at Stone in stunned amazement and then sputtered, “I don’t appreciate you assaulting me.”Stone ignored this. “Which way is the loading dock?”Caleb told him, and as they were heading out, Stone’s cell phone buzzed. It was Milton. Stone told him what had happened. “We’re going to follow the cylinders,” he said. “We’ll keep you posted.”Milton clicked off the phone and looked up at Annabelle. They were in her hotel room. He relayed what Stone had told him.“That could be dangerous,” she said. “They don’t really know what they’re getting into.”“But what can we do?”“We’re their backup, remember?”She ran to the closet, pulled out a bag and slipped a small box out of it.Milton immediately looked embarrassed because it was a tampon box.She noted his discomfort. “Don’t get all shy on me, Milton. Women always hide things they don’t want found in their tampon box.” She opened the box, took something out and slipped it in her pocket. “They said the name of the company was Fire Control. I’m assuming they’re going to the company’s storage facility. Can you find it?”“Your hotel has WiFi, so I can look it up on the Net,” Milton said, his fingers already flying over the keyboard.“Good. Is there a novelty store around here somewhere?” she added.He thought for a moment. “Yeah. It’s got like magic stuff too. And it’s open late.”“Perfect.”