---

author: ["David Baldacci"]
title: "The Collectors - Collectors_chap_3.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "David Baldacci - The Collectors"
tags: ["leo", "annabelle", "said", "man", "really", "card", "like", "get", "one", "right", "way", "around", "even", "looked", "table", "back", "hand", "joey", "best", "time", "guy", "little", "sat", "come", "hell"]
categories: [Mystery, Adult, Thriller]
url: /posts/davidbaldacci/TheCollectors-collectorschap3html

---

the collectors
CHAPTER 3OVER DINNER THAT NIGHT IN L.A. Annabelle laid out parts of her plan to Leo, including the two players she was looking to bring on.“Sounds good, but what about the long con? You haven’t told me about that.”“One step at a time,” she answered, fingering a wineglass, her gaze wandering around the swanky dining room automatically searching for potential marks.Take a breath, find a chump. She flicked her dyed-red hair out of her face and made momentary eye contact with a guy three tables down. This jerk had been ogling and overtly signaling Annabelle in her little black dress for the last hour while his humiliated date sat silently fuming. Now he slowly licked his lips and winked at her.Uh-uh, slick, you couldn’t even come close to handling it.Leo interrupted this thought. “Look, Annabelle, I’m not going to screw you. Hell, I came all this way.”“Right, you came all this way on my dime.”“We’re partners, you can tell me. It goes no further.”Her gaze drifted over him as she finished her cabernet. “Leo, don’t bother. Even you’re not that good of a liar.”A waiter came by and handed her a card. “From the gentleman over there,” he said, pointing to the man who’d been ogling her.Annabelle took the card. It said that the man was a talent agent. He’d also helpfully written on the back of the card a specific sex act he’d like to perform on her.Okay, Mr. Talent Agent. You asked for it.On the way out she stopped at a table with five stout guys in pinstripe suits. She said something and they all laughed. She gave one of them a pat on the head and another, a man of about forty with gray temples and thick shoulders, a peck on the cheek. They all laughed at something else Annabelle said. Then she sat down and talked with them for a few minutes. Leo looked at her curiously as Annabelle left the table and walked past him toward the exit.As she passed the talent agent’s table, he said, “Hey, baby, call me. I mean it. You are so hot, I’m on fire!”Annabelle swiped a glass of water off the tray of a passing waiter and said, “Well, then let’s cool you off, stud.” She dumped the water in the guy’s lap. He jumped up.“Damn it! You’re gonna pay for that, you crazy bitch.”His date covered her mouth to hide her laughter.Before the man could reach out to grab her, Annabelle shot out a hand and clutched his wrist. “You see those boys over there?” She nodded at the five suits that sat staring at the man hostilely. One of them cracked his knuckles. Another slid his hand inside his suit jacket and kept it there.Annabelle said smoothly, “I’m sure you saw me talking to them, since you’ve been staring at me all night. They’re the Moscarelli family. And the one on the end there is my ex, Joey Junior. Now, even though I’m no longer technically in the family, you never really leave the Moscarelli clan.”“Moscarelli?” the man said defiantly. “Who the hell are they?”“They were the number three organized crime family in Vegas before the FBI ran them and everybody else out. Now they’ve gone back to doing what they do best: controlling the garbage unions in the Big Apple and Newark.” She squeezed his arm. “So if you have a problem with your wet pants, I’m sure Joey will take care of it.”“You think I’m buying that crap?” the guy shot back.“Well, if you don’t believe me, go over there and talk to him about it.”The man looked over at the table again. Joey Junior was holding a steak knife in his beefy hand while one of the other men was attempting to keep him in his seat.Annabelle gripped the man’s arm tighter. “Or do you want me to have Joey come over here with some of his friends? Don’t worry; he’s out on parole right now, so he can’t bust you up really bad without ticking off the feds.”“No. No!” the alarmed man said as he tore his gaze from murderous Joey Junior and his steak knife. He added quietly, “I mean, it’s no big deal. Just a little water.” He sat back down and dabbed at his soaked crotch with a napkin.Annabelle turned to his date. The woman was trying and failing to hold back her giggles. “You think it’s funny, sweetie?” Annabelle said. “This is a case of where we’re all laughing at you, not with you. So why don’t you try finding some self-respect, or little shits like him are the only slime you’ll be waking up next to until you’re so old nobody will give a crap anymore. Including you.”The lady stopped laughing.On the way out of the restaurant Leo said, “Wow, and here I was wasting my time reading Dale Carnegie when all I needed to do was hang around you.”“Give it a rest, Leo.”“Okay, okay, but the Moscarelli family? Come on. Who were they really?”“Five accountants from Cincinnati probably looking to get laid tonight.”“You’re lucky they seemed pretty tough.”“It wasn’t luck. I said I was practicing a scene from a movie with a friend of mine in public. I told them it happens all the time in L.A. I asked them to help out, that they were to look like the mob; you know, to give us the right atmosphere to deliver our lines. I told them if they did well enough, they might even get a part in the film. It’s probably the most excitement they’ve ever had.”“Yeah, but how’d you know that jerk would collar you on the way out?”“Oh, I don’t know, Leo, maybe it was that tent pole in his pants. Or did you think I just threw the water in his crotch for the hell of it?”The next day Annabelle and Leo cruised down Wilshire Boulevard in Beverly Hills in a rented dark blue Lincoln. Leo intently eyed the shops they were passing. “How’d you get a lead on him?”“Usual sources. He’s young and doesn’t have much street experience, but his specialty is why I’m here.”Annabelle pulled into a parking place and pointed to a storefront up ahead. “Okay, that’s where gadget boy screws the retail consumer.”“What’s he like?”“Very metrosexual.”Leo looked at her quizzically. “Metrosexual? What the hell’s that? New kind of gay freak?”“You really need to get out more, Leo, and work on your PC skills.”A minute later Annabelle led Leo into a high-end clothing boutique. Inside the store, they were greeted by a lean, good-looking young man dressed all in chic black with slicked-back blond hair and a day’s worth of fashionable stubble on his face.“You here all by yourself today?” she asked him, looking around at the other well-heeled customers in the store. They’d have to be wealthy, she knew, since the shoes here started at a thousand bucks a pair, entitling the lucky owner to stumble around on four-inch golf tees until her Achilles snapped.He nodded. “But I enjoy working the store. I’m very service-oriented.”“I’m sure you are,” Annabelle said under her breath.After waiting until the other customers had left the shop, Annabelle put the Closed sign on the front door. Leo brought a woman’s blouse to the cash register while Annabelle wandered around behind the checkout area. Leo handed over his credit card, but it slipped out of the clerk’s hand and the man bent down to retrieve it. When he straightened up, he found Annabelle standing right behind him.“That’s a really neat toy you have there,” she said, eyeing the tiny machine the clerk had just swiped Leo’s card through.“Ma’am, you’re not allowed behind the counter,” he said, frowning.Annabelle ignored this comment. “Did you build it yourself?”The clerk said firmly, “It’s an antifraud machine. It confirms that the card is valid. It checks encryption codes embedded in the plastic. We’ve had a lot of stolen credit cards come in here, so the owner instructed us to start using it. I try to do it as unobtrusively as possible so no one gets embarrassed. I’m sure you can understand.”“Oh, I completely understand.” Annabelle reached by the clerk and slid out the device. “What this does, Tony, is read the name and account number, and the embedded verification code on the magnetic stripe so you can forge the card.”“Or more likely sell the numbers to a card ring that’ll do it,” Leo added. “That way you don’t have to get your metrosexual hands really dirty.”Tony looked at both of them. “How do you know my name? You cops?”“Oh, much better than that,” Annabelle said, putting her arm around his slender shoulders. “We’re people just like you.”Two hours later Annabelle and Leo were walking down the pier in Santa Monica. It was a bright cloudless day, and the ocean breeze delivered waves of deliciously warm air. Leo wiped his forehead with a handkerchief, took off his jacket and carried it over his arm.“Damn, I’d forgotten how nice it was out here.”“Beautiful weather and the best marks in the world,” Annabelle said. “That’s why we’re here. Because where the best marks are . . .”“Are where the best cons are,” Leo finished for her.She nodded. “Okay, that’s him, Freddy Driscoll, crown prince of bad paper.”Leo stared ahead, squinting against the sun, and read the small sign over the outdoor kiosk. “Designer Heaven?”“That’s right. Do it like I said.”“What other way is there to do it but like you said?” Leo grumbled.They reached the merchandise display where jeans, designer bags, watches and other accessories were neatly arranged. The older man next to the kiosk greeted them politely. He was small and plump with a pleasant face; tufts of white hair stuck out from underneath the straw hat he wore.“Wow, these are great prices,” Leo commented as he looked over the items.The man beamed proudly. “I don’t have the overhead of the fancy stores, just the sun, sand and ocean.”They looked through the merchandise, selected a few items, and Annabelle handed the man a hundred-dollar bill in payment.He took it from her, put on a pair of thick glasses, held the bill up at a certain angle and then quickly handed it back. “Sorry, ma’am, I’m afraid that’s a forgery.”“You’re right, it is,” she said casually. “But I thought it was fair to pay for fake goods with fake money.”The man didn’t even blink; he just smiled at her benignly.Annabelle examined the bill in the same way the man had. “The problem is that not even the best forger can really duplicate Franklin’s hologram when you hold the bill at this angle, because you’d need a two-hundred-million-dollar printing mill to get it right. There’s only one of them in the States, and no forger has access to it.”Leo piped in, “So you take a grease pen and do a nifty sketch of old Benny. That gives anyone smart enough to check the paper a little flash and the illusion that he saw the h-gram when he really didn’t.”“But you knew the difference,” Annabelle pointed out. “Because you used to make this paper about as well as anyone.” She held up a pair of jeans. “But from now on, I’d tell your supplier to take the time to stamp the brand name on the zipper like the real manufacturers do.” She put the jeans down and picked up a handbag. “And double-stitch the strap. That’s a dead giveaway too.”Leo held up a watch that was for sale. “And real Rolexes sweep smoothly, they don’t tick.”The man said, “I’m really shocked that I’ve been the victim of counterfeit merchandise. I saw a police officer just a few minutes ago farther down on the pier. I’ll go and get him. Please don’t leave; he’ll want your full statements.”Annabelle gripped his arm with her long, supple fingers. “Don’t waste your cover story on us,” she said. “Let’s talk.”“What about?” he asked warily.“Two shorts and then a long,” Leo answered, making the old man’s eyes light up.