---

author: ["CameronBrooks"]
title: "The Little Dipper Society"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "CameronBrooks - The Little Dipper Society"
tags: ["treasure", "self"]
categories: [Mystery, Treasure Hunt, Middle Grade]
url: /posts/kindlehighlights/dipper

---

Katie… It’s… She’s…” Tessa was trying to find the right words. “She’s really pretty, and skinny, and popular.” “Well, yes, she sounds horrible,” Dennis said as seriously as he could manage. “No, no, you don’t understand. She’s… mean!” Tessa said it a little louder than she meant to. “She’s always making fun of me, about my weight and saying that I’m weird, or that I’m childish. She’s just… Ugh, she’s everything I’m not!”
There was what looked like a brand-new backpack on the floor, with a shiny airline tag dangling from the side. It was one of those large, sturdy, waterproof backpacks with lots of straps that people took on camping trips. Tessa sighed. Big bags meant long stays.
“Katie!” Tessa’s mom said in English, in an overly cheerful tone of voice. “Now that Tessa is home, I think it’s time for you to unpack. Tessa will show you to your room.” Katie slowly removed one ear bud and shot them
both a long and very hostile glare. “Don’t bother. I’m not staying.”
Tessa led the way up the stairs. Katie was lagging behind and bumped the backpack up each step, dragging it behind her. Clunk, drag, clunk, drag. “Uhhh, do you need some help carrying that?” Tessa offered.
She looked at Katie and hesitated. “We’re going to the Clubhouse, if you want to come with us?” “Sure, sounds greaaat,” Katie said with a slow drawl. Tessa instantly regretted inviting her.
“There you go. Go check out the Clubhouse. I’m sure you’ll enjoy it.” *** Katie didn’t enjoy it one single bit. She was continuously complaining as she followed Tessa and Dennis through the backyard. “A Clubhouse? What are you both, like seven? I’m stuck here with a bunch of babies.”
Tessa took the key from underneath a bright blue flowerpot, unlocked the door, and held it open so the others could pass. “Watch your head, there’s bicycle wheels and other stuff hanging from the ceiling,” she warned Katie, who - after hesitating in the doorway - reluctantly entered. “There’d better not be any spiders in here,” Katie added one more complaint.
Tessa kept half an eye on Katie. Especially when she picked up the large unfinished blanket that was draped over the beanbag. Tessa had been working on it for months and was ready to intervene if Katie started to unravel it - by accident or intentionally.
Dennis and Tessa were talking in rapid Dutch, occasionally switching to English to give Katie directions. At some point they biked through part of a forest, over a crushed shell bike path that crunched beneath their tires, then turned onto a clinker street. But when they stopped in what seemed like the middle of nowhere, Katie’s mood instantly turned sour again. “We biked all this way for this?!”
It’s like the pyramids in Egypt, you know? Where for a long time people weren’t completely sure how they built them? Except these dolmens are much older.” “Well, at least now I don’t even have to read the stupid sign. I’ve got my own Wikipedia right here. You’re such a nerd!” Katie said.
“It’s likely these were burial grounds for important people, since it took a lot of time and effort to stack the rocks this way. You wouldn’t do that for just anybody.” Tessa said. Katie wrinkled her nose and was about to jump off. “You mean there’s dead people underneath here?” “Well, not anymore…”
Tessa’s enormous dust cloud was bothering Katie. She was still upside down and couldn’t use her hands to wave the dust away, so instead she said in a mocking tone. “So, do you still want to be an archeologist? Dig up old broken stuff and skeletons? It’s so dirty! I could never do that. Are you practicing now, or just kicking up dirt to annoy me?”
“Hey, Tessa, you OK?” “I said I was sorry,” Katie said. “What, are you crying or something?” Tessa ignored them both. She had felt her toe connect with something solid. Finally, she looked up at them. “I think there’s something buried here. Something big.”
“Come on, let’s help her dig!” Dennis excitedly took Katie’s hand and dragged her along. “Dig? No thanks,” Katie protested.
Tessa and Dennis continued to dig, Tessa with her bare hands and Dennis with a stick, and very soon the corner of something became visible. “Look!” Tessa gasped. “I think it’s a wooden box! Wait, if it’s really old, we should leave it and call someone. There are rules and laws for this and… Oh. Never mind, I can see a screw. It’s modern.”
“Well, it is a wooden box,” Katie said. “No,” Dennis said, “it’s a chest. Tess, I think you found your first real-life treasure.” “With money?” Katie was suddenly a bit more interested.
“Since we don’t have a key, how do we open it?” Dennis asked. “I don’t know,” Katie said. She picked up the chest and shook it vigorously. “Stop!” Tessa gasped in horror. “You could break what’s inside!”
“Hey, are you OK?” Dennis asked. “Fine!” Katie snapped as she briskly walked out and smacked a bicycle wheel out of her way after almost walking into it.
“Did I tell you the legend of the Witte Wieven?” Tessa asked Katie. “The White what?” “Women. It’s Drents dialect.” “No,” Katie shook her head. “The legend dates back to Germanic times, around the year 0 I think. Whenever it got really foggy around here there were all these white wisps floating through the landscape, because of all the peat in the ground. Imagine walking here - except this road was only a sandy path back then of course - and you are surrounded by heather and fog, and with every step you take you sink into the soggy ground a little. Everything is dead quiet, and in some areas the mist is thicker and completely surrounds you. You could see them from far away actually, these thick foggy wispy bits, especially at dusk or when the moonlight caught them. People used to think they were witches dressed in translucent white clothing, because they kind of moved a bit? According to the legend, some of them were good witches protecting the grounds, but there were also wicked witches who tried to lure you to your death. This was their explanation anyway, for why people sometimes vanished.” “What do you mean, vanished?” Katie asked uneasily. “Disappeared. Never to be seen again,” Tessa clarified. “In reality, they got stuck and drowned in the peat bogs.” Katie shuddered. “Thanks for that, Tess.”
Katie kept dragging her and shouted over her shoulder, “I hope you find your wallet soon!” She pulled Tessa all the way back to the bikes and hissed, “We have to go! Hurry!” “But… why..?!” Tessa asked, breathing hard as she tried to keep up with Katie, who was pedaling very fast. She glanced
A few hours later, Tessa and Katie took turns in the shower and got ready for bed. Katie was trying to get her arm into the sleeve of her pajamas when Tessa let out a sudden squeak. “What??” Tessa turned her phone around so Katie could read Dennis’ message on the screen. It’s open!!!!!
As soon as he heard them coming up the stairs, Dennis swung his bedroom door open. When they walked in, he slid the chest over to the corner of his desk, sliding it over the glossy surface. “I told you it was a treasure!”
Dennis took them out and put them on his desk next to the guilders. Tessa was not interested. “All plastic, modern stuff.” “Why would anyone bury these?” Katie wondered. “They’re not worth anything.”
Tessa carefully untied the string that was holding everything together and unfolded the package. It was a letter with three postcards tucked inside.
“Yeah,” Tessa grinned. “My mom always jokes that I’m probably going to be the first one in the world to also open up an archeology themed cookie store. Maybe I can sell Egyptian walking man speculaas cookies, or stroopwafel solidi, those would work great. And flint arrow head shaped ones dipped in chocolate, you know, like the arrowheads we fou-.”
The next morning Dennis carried a large plastic bag into the Clubhouse. “I brought the chest. I didn’t want my parents to find it in my room and start asking questions. When are we going to Old Man Boon?”
Jeremias has been a thief for most of his life, with a special fondness for paintings and archeological items of value, and apart from a previous three-year stint in prison, he has always managed to evade law enforcement.
She put her sketchbook down and picked up the chest. Seconds later there was a loud clatter that made both Tessa and Dennis jump half out of their seats. “What the…!?” “Oops,” Katie said.
“So, once we’re inside, what exactly are we looking for?” Katie asked. “Uhhh…” Both Dennis and Tessa mumbled awkwardly. “Treasure?” Dennis said, sounding very uncertain. “Yes, obviously,
“Anything?” Tessa asked her. “Just this patron saint dude on a horse,” Katie pointed at the weather vane, “no hidden treasure or gold or clues or anything. I think if it was here, people would have found it already.”
“How many steps did he say this was?” Dennis asked as they rushed to catch up. “Four hundred… and sixty… five” Tessa was breathing even harder than he was. “Easy peasy,” Katie commented, only slightly out of breath. “What? Don’t look so surprised. Gymnastics isn’t just about flexibility, you’ve got to have stamina too! Come on you wimps, before anyone misses us!”
They all sat down and started eating, but after a few bites Katie stopped. “What is that beeping?”
Tessa angled her head, “I hear it too.” She wiped her hand on her shorts and took her phone out of her back pocket to check it. “It’s not me.”
“Today was a great first day of treasure hunting,” Dennis said. “And at least now we know what the keychain is for.” He took the two new blocks out of his backpack and threw them inside the chest with the letter, the postcards and all the other stuff. Click.
Tessa and Katie glanced at each other. “Dennis picked
Tessa and Katie glanced at each other. “Dennis picked it,” Tessa felt here face turn bright red.
For a few seconds nothing happened. Then they heard one set of footsteps moving to the right… and coming up! Tessa, Dennis and Katie pressed their backs against the wall.
Katie, Dennis and Tessa looked at each other with wide eyes. For a brief moment forgetting how scared they were. Did he just say Jeremias?
“Thanks for the info, Tess,” Dennis said slightly distracted. “Did you guys hear what that one man said about Jeremias hiding something? I wonder how they know. Oh, this is really good!” “Good?!” Tessa said incredulously. “How is any of this good ?!
They walked back down the stairs and carefully looked around before following the sandy path back to the castle. “The only word that I did understand was society,” Katie said, “do you guys know what that is referring to?”
Since Dennis and Katie didn’t stop her, Tessa continued. “The French converted it into a sort of hotel for their army.
“I’m not sure anything you said makes it any less boring,” Katie grumbled. “Imagine what it was like, being one of those people!” Tessa said. “Like King Willem II, one minute you’re this brave king leading your army into war, the next minute you’re shot straight off your horse and you have to make the whole trip back to the Netherlands. While you’re badly injured. In a wobbly stage coach.
“Uh…” Tessa stuttered. This little fact somehow hadn’t shown up when Dennis had googled the history of the Korenbeurs.
Tessa kneeled down and mindlessly stroked Shiva’s head. Then she frowned, looked at the side of the wall a little closer, and gasped. She couldn’t believe her luck! One of the bricks in the wall was slightly different from the others.
They added more soil to the sandbank to turn it into a proper island when they were building the Deltawerken.” Tessa glanced at her parents and said with extra emphasis. “I think it will be interesting to see the island. There’s an old storm surge pillar there that they built as a backup,
“You didn’t see this on Google?” Tessa shook her head. “There was a marker on this island, but maybe I didn’t zoom in far enough. I… uh… thought this one would be easy.”
Dennis half turned around and found himself face to face with one of the three men, firmly holding onto the strap of his backpack. He shrugged himself loose and shouted. “Run!!!”
Past other people and tourists who blocked the paths until finally Dennis shoved both Katie and Tessa onto a side path that led into the small cave behind the waterfall. And then they were trapped.
They heard running footsteps over the woodchips at the far end of the backyard, coming closer and changing to a crunching sound when they hit the pebbles. “Daaaad?!” Tessa shouted.
Tessa shot up again and Katie was now wide awake as well. They heard running footsteps over the woodchips at the far end of the backyard, coming closer and changing to a crunching sound when they hit the pebbles. “Daaaad?!” Tessa shouted.
