---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "A Is for Alibi - index_split_022.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - A Is for Alibi"
tags: ["said", "know", "gwen", "got", "could", "back", "might", "right", "laurence", "time", "waitress", "get", "tell", "lyle", "fear", "fife", "look", "sure", "like", "thought", "see", "must", "much", "office", "name"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/AIsforAlibi-indexsplit022html

---


Unknown
CHAPTER 21There were two messages on my answering service. The first was from Garry Steinberg. I called him back.“Hey, Kinsey,” he said when I’d been put through.“Hi, Garry. How are you?”“Not bad. I’ve got a little piece of information for you,” he said. I could tell from his tone that he was feeling satisfied with himself, but what he said next still took me by surprise.“I looked up that job application on Lyle Abernathy this morning. Apparently he worked for a while as an apprentice to a locksmith. Some old guy named Fears.“A locksmith?”“That’s right. I called the guy this morning. You’d have loved it. I said Abernathy had applied for a job as a security guard and I was doing a background check. Fears hemmed and hawed some and finally said he’d had to fire the kid. Fears was getting a lot of complaints about missing cash on jobs where Lyle had worked and he began to suspect he was involved in petty thievery. He never could prove it, but he couldn’t afford to take the chance, so he let Lyle go.”“Oh God, that’s great,” I said. “That means Lyle could have gotten into the Fifes’ house anytime he wanted to. Libby’s too.”“It looks that way. He worked for Fears for eight months and he sure picked up enough information to give it a try, judging from what Fears said. Unless they had burglar alarms or something like that.”“Listen, the only security system they had in effect was a big German shepherd that got hit by a car six weeks before Laurence Fife died. He and his wife and kids were away when the dog was killed.”“Nice,” Garry said. “Nothing you could prove after all this time, but it might put you on the right track at any rate. What about the application? You want a copy?”“I’d love it. What about Fife’s accounts?”“I’ve got those at my place and I’ll look at ’em when I can. It’s a lot of stuff. In the meantime, I just thought you might want to know about that locksmith stint.”“I appreciate your help. Jesus, what a shmuck that guy is.”“I’ll say. Hey, I got another call coming in. I’ll be in touch.” He gave me his home phone in case I needed him.“You’re terrific. Thanks.”The second message was from Gwen at K-9 Korners. One of her assistants answered and I listened to assorted dogs bark and whine while Gwen came to the phone.“Kinsey?”“Yeah, it’s me. I got your call. What’s happening?”“Are you free for lunch?”“Just a minute. I’ll check my appointment book,” I said. I put my palm against the mouth of the receiver and looked at my watch. It was 1:45. Had I eaten lunch? Had I even eaten breakfast today? “Yes, I’m free.”“Good. I’ll meet you at the Palm Garden in fifteen minutes if that’s okay for you.”“Sure. Fine. See you shortly.”My glass of white wine had just arrived when I glanced up to see Gwen approaching from across the courtyard: tall and lean, her gray hair slicked away from her face. The blouse she wore was a gray silk, long full sleeves nipped in at the wrist, the dark gray skirt emphasizing her trim waist and hips. She was stylish, confident--like Nikki in that--and I could see where both women must have appealed to Laurence Fife. I guessed that once upon a time Charlotte Mercer fit the same mold: a woman of stature, a woman of taste. I wondered idly if Libby Glass would have aged as well had she lived. She must have been much less secure at twenty-four, but bright, someone whose freshness and ambition might have appealed to Laurence as he neared the age of forty. God save us all from the consequences of male menopause, I thought.“Hello. How are you,” Gwen said briskly, sitting down.She removed the napkin beside her plate and ordered wine as the waitress passed. Close up, her image softened, the angularity of her cheekbones offset by the large brown eyes, the purposeful mouth tinted with soft pink. Most of all, there was her manner: amused, intelligent, feminine, refined.“How are all the dogs?” I said.She laughed. “Filthy. Thank God. We’re swamped today, but I wanted to talk to you. You’ve been out of town.”“I just got back Saturday. Have you been trying to get in touch?”She nodded. “I called the office on Tuesday, I think. Your answering service said you were in Los Angeles so I tried to reach you there. Some total nitwit answered-”“Arlette.”“Well, whoever it was, she got my name wrong twice so I hung up.”The waitress arrived with Gwen’s wine.“Have you ordered yet?”I shook my head. “I was waiting for you.”The waitress got out her order card, glancing at me.“I’ll have the chef’s salad,” I said.“Make that two.”“Dressing?”“Blue cheese,” I said.“I’ll have oil and vinegar,” Gwen said and then handed both menus to the waitress, who moved away. Gwen turned her attention to me.“I’ve decided I should level with you.”“About what?”“My old lover,” she said. Her cheeks had flushed mildly. “I realized that if I didn’t tell you who he was, you’d be off on some wild-goose chase, wasting a lot of time trying to find out his name. It really amounts to more mystery than it’s worth.“How so?”“He died a few months ago of a heart attack, “she said, her manner turning brisk again. “After I talked to you, I tried tracking him down myself. His name was David Ray. He was a schoolteacher. Greg’s, as a matter of fact, which is how we met. I thought he should know that you were asking questions about Laurence’s death, or at any rate that your curiosity might lead you to him.”“How’d you find him?”“I’d heard that he and his wife had moved to San Francisco. Apparently he was living in the Bay Area, where he was a principal of one of the Oakland public schools.“Why not tell me before?”She shrugged. “Misplaced loyalty. Protectiveness. That was a very important relationship and I didn’t want him involved at this late date.”She looked at me and she must have read the skepticism in my face. The flush in her cheeks deepened almost imperceptibly.“I know how it looks,” she said. “First I refuse to give you his name and then he’s dead and out of reach, but that’s exactly the point. If he were still alive, I don’t know that I’d be telling you this.”I thought that was probably true, but there was something else going on and I wasn’t sure what it was. The waitress arrived with our salads and there was a merciful few minutes in which we busied ourselves with melba rounds. Gwen was rearranging her lettuce but she wasn’t eating much. I was curious to hear what else she had to say and too hungry to worry about it much until I’d eaten some.“Did you know he had heart trouble?” I asked finally.“I had no idea, but I gather he was ill for years.”“Did he break off the relationship or did you?”Gwen smiled bitterly “Laurence did that but I wonder now if David might have engineered it to some extent. The whole affair must have complicated his life unbearably.“He’d told his wife?”“I think so. She was very gracious on the phone. I told her that Greg had asked me to get in touch and she played right along. When she told me that David was dead, I was... I didn’t even know what to say to her but of course, I had to babble right on-how sorry, how sad... like some disinterested bystander making the right noises somehow. It was awful. Terrible.”“She didn’t mention your relationship herself?”“Oh no. She was much too cool for that, but she did know exactly who I was. Anyway, I’m sorry I didn’t tell you to begin with.”“No harm done,” I said.“How’s it going otherwise?” she asked.I felt myself hesitate. “Bits and pieces. Nothing concrete.”“Do you really expect to turn up anything after all this time?”I smiled. “You never know. People get careless when they’re feeling safe.”“I guess that’s true.”We talked briefly about Greg and Diane and my visits with them, which I edited heavily. At 2:50 Gwen glanced at her watch.“I’ve got to get back,” she said, fishing in her purse for her billfold. She took out a five-dollar bill. “Will you keep in touch?”“Sure,” I said. I took a sip of wine, watching her get up. “When did you last see Colin?”She focused abruptly on my face. “Colin?”“I just met him Saturday,” I said as though that explained it. “I thought maybe Diane might like to know he’s back. She’s fond of him.”“Yes, she is,” Gwen said. “I don’t know when I saw him last myself. Diane’s graduation, I guess. Her junior-high-school graduation. What makes you ask?”I shrugged. “Just curious,” I said. I gave her what I hoped was my blandest look. A mild pink patch had appeared on her neck and I wondered if that could be introduced in court as a lie-detecting device. “I’ll take care of the tip,” I said.“Let me know how it goes,” she said, all casual again. She tucked the money under her plate and moved off at the same efficient pace that had brought her in. I watched her departure, thinking that something vital had gone unsaid. She could have told me about David Ray on the phone. And I wasn’t entirely convinced she hadn’t known about his death to begin with. Colin popped into my head.I walked the two blocks to Charlie’s office. Ruth was typing from a Dictaphone, fingers moving lightly across the keyboard. She was very fast.“Is he in?”She smiled and nodded me on back, not missing a word, gaze turned inward as she translated sound to paper with no lag time in between.I stuck my head into his office. He was sitting at his desk, coat off, a law book open in front of him. Beige shirt, dark brown vest. When he saw me, a slow smile formed and he leaned back, tucking an arm up over the back of his swivel chair. He tossed the pencil on his desk.“Are you free for dinner?” I said.“What’s up?”“Nothing’s up. It’s a proposition,” I said.“Six-fifteen.”“I’ll be back,” I said and closed his office door again, still thinking about that pale shirt and the dark brown vest. Now that was sexy. A man in a nylon bikini, with that little knot sticking out in front, isn’t half as interesting as a man in a goodlooking business suit. Charlie’s outfit reminded me of a Reese’s Peanut Butter Cup with a bite taken out and I wanted the rest.I drove out to Nikki’s beach house.
