---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "A Is for Alibi - index_split_008.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - A Is for Alibi"
tags: ["said", "time", "could", "know", "like", "look", "one", "marcia", "door", "year", "well", "think", "see", "back", "threadgill", "old", "tell", "thought", "maybe", "go", "got", "even", "face", "looked", "never"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/AIsforAlibi-indexsplit008html

---


Unknown
CHAPTER 7I stopped off at the Montebello Pharmacy while I was in the neighborhood. The pharmacist, whose name tag said “Carroll Sims,” was in his fifties, medium height, with mild brown eyes behind mild tortoiseshell frames. He was in the midst of explaining to quite an old woman exactly what her medication was and how it should be taken. She was both puzzled and exasperated by the explanation but Sims was tactful, answering her flustered inquiries with a benign goodwill. I could imagine people showing him their warts and cat bites, describing chest pains and urinary symptoms across the counter. When it was my turn, I wished I had some little ill I could tell him about. Instead, I showed him my I. D.“What can I do for you?”“Did you happen to work here eight years ago when Laurence Fife was murdered?”“Well I sure did. I own the place. Are you a friend of his?”“No,” I said, “I’ve been hired to look into the whole case again. I thought this was a logical place to start.”“I don’t think I can be much help. I can tell you the medication he was taking, dosage, number of refills, the doctor who prescribed it, but I can’t tell you how the switch was made. Well, I can tell you that. I just can’t tell you who did it.”Most of the information Sims gave me I already knew. Laurence was taking an antihistamine called HistaDril, which he’d been on for years. He consulted an allergist about once a year and the rest of the time the refill on the medication was, automatically okayed. The only thing Sims told me that I hadn’t known was that HistaDril had recently been taken off the market because of possible carcinogenic side-effects.“In other words, if Fife had just taken the medication for a few more years, he might have gotten cancer and died anyway.”“Maybe,” the pharmacist said. We stared at one another for a moment.“I don’t suppose you have any idea who killed him,” I said.“Nope.”“Well, I guess that’s that. Did you see any of the trial?”“Just when I testified. I identified the pill bottle as one of ours. It had been pretty recently refilled but Fife himself had done that and we’d chitchatted at the time. He’d been taking HistaDril for so long we hardly needed to talk about that.”“Do you remember what you did talk about?”“Oh, the usual thing. I think there was a fire burning across the backside of the city about that time and we talked about that. A lot of people with allergies were bothered by the increase in air pollution.”“Was it bothering him?”“It bothered everyone a little bit but I don’t remember him being any worse off than anyone else.”“Well,” I said, “I thank you for your time. If you think of anything else, will you give me a buzz? I’m in the book.”“Sure, if I think of anything,” he said.It was midafternoon and I wasn’t meeting Gwen again until 6:00. I felt restless and out of sorts. Bit by bit, I was putting together background information, but nothing was really happening yet, and as far as I knew nothing might ever come of it. As far as the state of California was concerned, justice had been served and only Nikki Fife stood in contradiction of this. Nikki and the nameless, faceless killer of Laurence Fife who had enjoyed eight years of immunity from prosecution, eight years of freedom that I was now being hired to violate. At some point, I was bound to tread on someone’s toes and that someone was not going to be happy with me.I decided to go spy on Marcia Threadgill. At the time she tripped on that crack in the sidewalk, she had just come from the craft shop, having purchased items necessary to make one of those wooden purses covered with assorted shells. I imagined her decoupaging orange crates, making clever hanging ornaments out of egg cartons festooned with plastic sprigs of lily of the valley. Marcia Threadgill was twenty-six years old and she suffered from bad taste. The owner of the craft shop had filled me in on the projects she had done and every bit of it reminded me of my aunt. Marcia Threadgill was cheap at heart. She turned common trash into Christmas gifts. This is the mentality, in my opinion, that leads to cheating insurance companies and other sly ruses. This is the kind of person who would write to the Pepsi-Cola bottling plant claiming to have found a mouse hair in her drink, trying to net herself a free case of soda.I parked a few doors down from her apartment and got out my binoculars. I slouched, focusing on her patio, and then sat up. “Well I’ll be damned,” I breathed.In place of the nasty brown withered fern was a hanging plant of mammoth proportions, which must have weighed twenty pounds. Now how had she lifted that up to attach to a hook high above her head? A neighbor? A boyfriend? Had she done it herself perchance? I could even see the price tag stuck to one side of the pot. She’d bought it at a Gateway supermarket for $29.95, which was quite a price considering that it was probably full of fruit flies.“Shit,” I said. Where was I when she hoisted that mama up? Twenty pounds of glossy plant and moist soil on a chain at shoulder height. Had she stood on a chair? I drove straight over to the nearby Gateway supermarket and headed back to the produce department. There were five or six such plants-Dumbo ears or elephant tongues, whatever the damn things are called. I lifted one. Oh my God. It was worse than I had thought. Awkward and heavy, impossible to manage without help. I picked up some film in the Ten Items or Less, No Checks line and loaded my camera. “Marcia, you little sweetheart,” I cooed, “I’m gonna nail your ass.”I drove back to her apartment and got out my binoculars again. I’d no more than settled down on my spine, glasses trained on her patio, than Ms. Threadgill herself appeared, trailing one of those long plastic hoses, which must have been attached to her faucet inside. She misted and sprayed and watered and carried on, poking a finger down into the dirt, plucking a yellowing leaf from another potted plant on the patio rail. A real obsessive type by the look of it, inspecting the underside of leaves for God knows what pests. I studied her face. She looked like she’d spent about forty-five dollars having a free makeup demonstration in some department store. Mocha and caramel on her eyelids. Raspberry on her cheekbones. Lipstick the color of chocolate. Her fingernails were long and painted the approximate shade of cherry syrup in the sort of boxed candies you wish you hadn’t bitten into so eagerly.An old woman in a nylon jersey dress came out onto the patio above Marcia’s and the two had a conversation. I guessed that it was some kind of complaint because neither looked happy and Marcia eventually flounced away. The old lady yelled something after her that looked dirty even in pantomime. I got out of the car and locked it, taking a clipboard and legal pad.Marcia’s apartment was listed on the register as 2-C. The apartment above hers was listed under the name Augusta White. I bypassed the elevator and took the stairs, pausing first outside Marcia’s door. She was playing a Barry Manilow album full-blast, and even as I listened she cranked up the volume a notch or two. I went up another flight and tapped on Augusta’s door. She was there in a flash, her face thrust forward through the crack like a Pekingese, complete with bulging eyes, pug nose, and chin whiskers. “Yes?” she snapped. She was eighty years old if a day.“I’m in the building next door,” I said. “We’ve had some complaints about the noise and the manager asked me to look into it. Could I talk to you?” I held up my official-looking clipboard.“Hold on.”She moved away from the door and stomped back into her kitchen to get her broom. I heard her bang on the kitchen floor a few times. From below, there was a mighty thump, as though Marcia Threadgill had whacked on the ceiling with a combat boot.Augusta White stomped back, squinting at me through the crack. “You look like a real-estate agent to me,” she said suspiciously.“Well, I’m not. Honest.”“You look like one anyway so just go on off with your papers. I know all the people next door and you aren’t one.” She slammed the door-shut and shot the bolt into place.So much for that. I shrugged and made my way back down the stairs. Outside again, I made an eyeball assessment of the terraces. The patios were staggered in a pyramid effect and I had a quick flash of myself climbing up the outside of the building like a second-story man to spy on Marcia Threadgill at close range. I had really hoped I could enlist someone’s aid in getting a firsthand report of Ms. Threadgill, but I was going to have to let it slide for a moment. I took some pictures of the hanging plant from the vantage point of my car, hoping it would soon wither and perish from a bad case of root rot. I wanted to be there when she hung a new one into place.I went back to my apartment and jotted down some notesIt was 4:45 and I changed into my jogging clothes: a pair of shorts and an old cotton turtleneck. I’m really not a physical fitness advocate. I’ve been in shape maybe once in my life, when I qualified for the police academy, but there’s something about running that satisfies a masochistic streak. It hurts and I’m slow but I have good shoes and I like the smell of my own sweat. I run on the mile and a half of sidewalk that tracks the beach, and the air is usually slightly damp and very clean. Palm trees line the wide grassy area between the sidewalk and the sand and there are always other joggers, most of them looking lots better than I.I did two miles and then called it quits. My calves hurt. My chest was burning. I buffed and puffed, bending from the waist, imagining all kinds of toxic wastes pumping out through my pores and lungs, a regular purge. I walked for half a block and then I heard a car horn toot. I glanced over. Charlie Scorsoni had pulled in at the curb in a pale blue 450 SL that looked very good on him. I wiped the sweat trickling down my face on an upraised shirt sleeve and crossed to his car.“Your cheeks are bright pink,” he said.“I always look like I’m having an attack. You should see the looks I get. What are you doing down here?”“I felt guilty. Because I cut you short yesterday. Hop in.”“Oh no.” I laughed, still trying to catch my breath. “I don’t want to get sweat all over your seats.”“Can I follow you back to your place?”“Are you serious?”“Sure,” he said. “I thought I’d be especially winsome so you wouldn’t put me on your ‘possibly guilty’ list.”“Won’t help. I’m suspicious of everyone.”When I came out of the shower and stuck my head around the bathroom door, Scorsoni was looking at the books stacked up on my desk. “Did you have time to search through the drawers?” I asked.He smiled benignly. “They were locked.”I smiled and closed the bathroom door again, getting dressed. I noticed that I was pleased to see him and that didn’t sit well with me. I’m a real hard-ass when it comes to men. I don’t often think of a forty-eight-year-old man as “cute” but that’s how he struck me. He was big and his hair had a nice curl to it, his rimless glasses making his blue eyes look almost luminous. The dimple in his chin didn’t hurt either.I left the bathroom, moving toward the kitchenette in my bare, feet. “Want a beer?”He was sitting on the couch by then, leafing through a book about auto theft. “Very literate taste,” he said. “Why don’t you let me buy you a drink?”“I have to be somewhere at six,” I said.“Beer’s fine then.”I uncapped it and handed it to him, sitting down at the other end of the couch with my feet tucked up under me. “You must have left the office early. I’m flattered.”“I’ll go back tonight. I have to go out of town for a couple of days and I’ll have to get my briefcase packed, tidy up some loose ends for Ruth.”“Why take time out for me?”Scorsoni gave me a quizzical smile with the barest hint of irritation. “God, so defensive. Why not take time out for you? If Nikki didn’t kill Laurence, I’m as interested as anyone in finding out who did it, that’s all.”“You don’t believe she’s innocent for a minute,” I said.“I believe you believe it,” he said.I looked at him carefully. “I can’t give you information. I hope you understand that. I could use any help you’ve got and if you have a brainstorm, I’d love to hear it, but it can’t be a twoway street.”“You want to lecture an attorney about client privilege, is that it? Jesus Christ, Millhone. Give me a break.”“Okay, okay. I’m sorry,” I said. I looked down at his big hands and then up at his face again. “I just didn’t want my brain picked, that’s all.”His expression relaxed and his smile was lazy. “You said you didn’t know anything anyway,” he pointed out, “so what’s to pick? You’re such a goddamn grouch.”I smiled then. “Listen, I don’t know what my chances are on this thing. I don’t have a feel for it yet and it’s making me nervous.”“Yeah and you’ve been working on it--what--two days?”“About that.”“Then give yourself a break while you’re at it.” He took a sip of beer and then with a small tap set the bottle on the coffee table. “I wasn’t very honest with you yesterday,” he said.“About what?”“Libby Glass. I did know who she was and I suspected that he was into some kind of relationship with her. I just didn’t think it was any of your business.”“I don’t see how it could make any difference at this point,” I said.“That’s what I decided. And maybe it’s important to your case--who knows? I think since he died, I’ve tended to invest him with a purity he never really had. He played around a lot. But his taste usually ran to the moneyed class. Older women. Those slim elegant ones who marry aristocracy.”“What was Libby like?”“I don’t really know. I ran into her a couple of times when she was setting up our tax account. She seemed nice enough. Young. She couldn’t have been more than twenty-five or twenty-six.”“Did he tell you he was having an affair with her?”“Oh no, not him. I never knew him to kiss and tell.”“A real gentleman,” I said.Scorsoni shot me a warning look.“I’m not being facetious,” I said hastily. “I’ve heard he kept his mouth shut about the women in his life. That’s all I meant.”“Yeah, he did. He played everything close to his chest.That’s what made him a good attorney too. He never tipped his hand, never telegraphed. The last six months before he died, he was odd though, protective. There were times when I almost thought he wasn’t well, but it wasn’t physical. It was some kind of psychic pain, if you’ll excuse the phrase.”“You had drinks with him that night, didn’t you?”“We had dinner. Down at the Bistro. Nikki was off someplace and we played racquetball and then had a bite to eat. He was fine as far as I could tell.”“Did he have the allergy medication with him then?”Scorsoni shook his head. “He wasn’t much for pills anyway. Tylenol if he had a headache, but that was rare. Even Nikki admitted that he took the allergy cap after he got home. It had to be someone who had access to that.“Had Libby Glass been up here?”“Not for business as far as I know. She might have come up to see him but he never said anything to me. Why?”“I don’t know. I was just thinking that somebody might have dosed them both somehow at the same time. She didn’t die until four days later but that’s not hard to explain if the caps were self-administered.”“I never heard much about her death. I don’t even think it hit the papers here. He was down in Los Angeles though, I do know that. About a week and a half before he died.”“That’s interesting. I’m going down there anyway. Maybe I can check that out.”He glanced at his watch. “I better let you go,” he said, getting up. I got up and ambled to the door with him, oddly reluctant to see him go.“How’d you lose the weight?” I said.“What, this?” he asked, slapping his midsection. He leaned toward me slightly as though he meant to confide some incredible regimen of denial and self-abuse.“I gave up candy bars. I used to keep ’em in my desk drawer,” he murmured conspiratorially. “Snickers and Three Musketeers, Hershey’s Kisses, with the silver wrappers and the little paper wick at the top? A hundred a day.”I could feel a laugh bubble up because his tone was caressing and he sounded like he was confessing to a secret addiction to wearing panty hose. Also because I knew if I turned my face, I’d be closer to him than I thought I could cope with at that point.“Mars Bars? Baby Ruths?” I said.“All the time,” he said. I could almost feel the heat of his face and I slid a look up at him sideways. He laughed at himself then, breaking the spell, and his eyes held mine only a little longer than they should. “I’ll see you,” he said.We shook hands as he left. I didn’t know why--maybe just an excuse to touch. Even a contact that casual made the hairs stand up along my arm. My early-warning system was clanging away like crazy and I wasn’t sure how to interpret it. It’s the same sensation I have sometimes on the twenty-first floor when I open a window--a terrible attraction to the notion of tumbling out. I go a long time between men and maybe it was time again. Not good, I thought, not good.
