---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "A Is for Alibi - index_split_004.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - A Is for Alibi"
tags: ["nikki", "rosie", "never", "said", "think", "might", "even", "little", "know", "note", "would", "place", "see", "table", "like", "time", "something", "glass", "laurence", "one", "sometimes", "office", "check", "well", "left"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/AIsforAlibi-indexsplit004html

---


Unknown
CHAPTER 3I do most of my hanging out in a neighborhood bar called Rosie’s. It’s the sort of place where you look to see if the chair needs brushing off before you sit down. The plastic seats have little rips in them that leave curls of nylon on the underside of your stockings and the tables have black Formica tops handetched with words like hi. To the left above the bar, there’s a dusty marlin, and when people get drunk, Rosie lets them shoot rubber-tipped arrows at it with a toy gun, thus averting aggressions that might otherwise erupt into vicious barroom snits.The place appeals to me for a couple of reasons. Not only is it close to my home but it is never attractive to tourists, which means that most of the time it’s half-empty and perfect for private conversations. Then, too, Rosie’s cooking is inventive, a sort of devil-may-care cuisine with a Hungarian twist. It is with Rosie that Henry Pitts barters baked goods, so I get to eat his breads and pies as a dividend. Rosie is in her sixties with a nose that almost meets her upper lip, a low forehead, and hair dyed a remarkable shade of rust, rather like the color of cheap redwood furniture. She also does tricky things with an eyebrow pencil that makes her eyes look small and suspect.When Nikki walked in that night, she hesitated, scanning the place. Then she spotted me and moved through the empty tables to the booth where I usually sit. She slid in across from me and eased out of her jacket. Rosie ambled over, eyeing Nikki with uneasiness. Rosie is convinced that I do business with Mafia types and drug crazies and she was probably trying to determine the category into which Nikki Fife might fit.“So are you eating something or what?” Rosie said, getting straight to the point.I glanced at Nikki. “Have you had dinner?”She shook her head. Rosie’s eyes moved from Nikki to me as though I might be translating for a deaf-mute.“What have you got tonight?”“It’s veal porkolt. Veal cubes, lotta onion, paprika, and tomato paste. You’ll love it. You’ll go nuts. It’s the best kinda stew I make. Henry’s rolls and everything, and on a plate I’m gonna put some good soft cheese and a coupla gherkins.”She was already writing the order down as she spoke, so it didn’t require much from us in the way of consent. “You gonna have wine too. I’ll pick the kind.”When Rosie had left, I related the information I’d picked up in the files about the murder of Libby Glass, including the telephone calls that had been traced to Laurence’s home phone.“Did you know about her?”Nikki shook her head. “I heard the name but it was through my attorney, sometime during the trial, I think. I can’t even remember now what was said.”“You never heard Laurence mention her? Never saw her name written down anyplace?”“No little love notes if that’s what you mean. He was meticulous about that sort of thing. He was once named as correspondent in a divorce action because of some letters he wrote and after that, he seldom put anything personal in writing. I usually knew when he was involved with someone but never because he left cryptic notes or telephone numbers on matchbook covers or anything like that.”I thought about that one for a minute. “What about phone bills though? Why leave those around?”“He didn’t,” Nikki said. “All the bills were sent to the business-management firm in Los Angeles.”“And Libby Glass handled the account?”“Apparently she did.”“So maybe he called her on business matters.”Nikki shrugged. She was a little less remote than she had been but I still had the feeling that she was one step removed from what was happening. “He was having an affair with someone.”“How do you know?”“The hours he kept. The look on his face.” She paused, apparently thinking back. “Sometimes he would smell of someone else’s soap. I finally accused him of that and afterwards he had a shower installed at the office and used the same kind of soap there that we used at home.“Did he see women down at the office?”“Ask his partner,” she said with the faintest tinge of bitterness. “Maybe he even screwed ’em on the office couch, I don’t know. Anyway it was little things. It sounds stupid now, but once he came home and the edge of his sock was turned down. It was summer and he said he’d been out playing tennis. He had on tennis shorts and he’d worked up a sweat all right, but not out on a public court. I really zapped him that time.“But what would he say when you confronted him?”“He’d admit it sometimes. Why not? I didn’t have any proof and adultery isn’t grounds for divorce in this state anyway.”Rosie arrived with the wine and two paper napkins wrapped around some silverware. Nikki and I were both silent until she’d departed again.“Why did you stay married to him if he was such a jerk?”“Cowardice I guess,” she said. “I would have divorced him eventually, but I had a lot at stake.”“Your son?”“Yes.” Her chin came up slightly, whether from pride of defensiveness I wasn’t sure. “His name is Colin,” she said. “He’s twelve. I have him in a boarding school up near Monterey.”“You also had Laurence’s kids living with you at the time, didn’t you?”“Yes, that’s right. A boy and a girl, both in school.”“Where are they now?”“I have no idea. His ex-wife is here in town. You might check with her if you’re curious. I don’t hear from them.”“Did they blame you for his death?”She leaned forward, her manner intense. “Everyone blamed me. Everyone believed I was guilty. And now I take it Con Dolan thinks I killed Libby Glass too. Isn’t that what you were getting at?”“Who cares what Dolan thinks? I don’t think you did it and I’m the one going to work on this thing. Which reminds me. We ought to get the financial end of it clarified. I charge thirty bucks an hour plus mileage. I’d like to have at least a grand up front. I’ll send you an itemized accounting from week to week indicating what time I’ve put in doing what. Also, you have to understand that my services are not exclusive. I sometimes handle more than one case at a time.”Nikki was already reaching into her purse. She took out a checkbook and a pen. Even looking at it upside down, I could see that the check was for five thousand dollars. I admired the carelessness with which she dashed it off. She didn’t even have to check her bank balance first. She pushed it across the table to me and I tucked it into my purse as though I disposed of such matters as casually as she.Rosie appeared again, this time with our dinner. She put a plate down in front of each of us and then stood there until we began to eat. “Mmm, Rosie, it’s wonderful,” I said.She wiggled slightly in place, not yielding her ground.“Maybe it don’t suit your friend,” she said, looking at me instead of Nikki.“Marvelous,” Nikki murmured. “Really it is.”“She loves it,” I said. Rosie’s gaze slid across to Nikki’s face and she finally seemed satisfied that Nikki’s appreciation of the dish was equaled only by my own.I let the conversation wander while we ate. Between the good food and the wine, Nikki seemed to be letting down her guard. Under that cool, unruffled surface, signs of life were beginning to show, as though she were just wakening from a curse that had rendered her immobile for years.“Where do you think I should start?” I asked.“Well I don’t know. I’ve always been curious about his secretary back then. Her name was Sharon Napier. She was already working for him when he and I met, but there was something not right about her, something in her attitude.”“Was she involved with him?”“I don’t think so. I really don’t know what it was. I could just about guarantee they didn’t have any sexual ties, but something had gone on. She was sometimes sarcastic with him, which Laurence never tolerated from anyone. The first time I heard her do it, I thought he’d cut her down, but he never batted an eye. She never took any guff from him at all, wouldn’t stay late, wouldn’t come in on weekends when he had a big case coming up. He never complained about her either, just went out and hired temporary help when he needed it. It wasn’t like him, but when I asked him about it, he acted as if I were crazy, reading significance into the situation when there wasn’t any. She was gorgeous, too, hardly the run-of-the-mill office type.”“Do you have any idea where she is now?”Nikki shook her head. “She used to live up on Rivera but she’s not there now. At least, she’s not listed in the telephone book.”I made a note of her last-known address. “I take it you never knew her well.”Nikki shrugged. “We had the customary exchanges when I called the office but it was just routine stuff.”“What about friends of hers or places she might hang out?”“I don’t know. My guess is she lived way beyond her means. She traveled every chance she could and she dressed a lot better than I did back then.”“She testified at the trial, didn’t she?”“Yes, unfortunately. She’d been a witness to a couple of nasty quarrels I had with him and that didn’t help.”“Well, it’s worth looking into,” I said. “I’ll see if I can get a line on her. Is there anything else about him? Was he in the middle of any hassles when he died? Any kind of personal dispute or a big legal case?”“Not that I knew. He was always in the middle of something big.”“Well, I think the first move is to talk to Charlie Scorsoni and see what he has to say. Then we’ll figure it out from there.”I left money on the table for the dinner check and we walked out together. Nikki’s car was parked close by, a dark green Oldsmobile ten years out of date. I waited until she’d pulled away and then I walked the half block to my place.When I got in, I poured myself a glass of wine and sat down to organize the information I’d collected so far. I have a system of consigning data to three-by-five index cards. Most of my notes have to do with witnesses: who they are, how they’re related to the investigation, dates of interviews, follow-up.Some cards are background information I need to check out and some are notes about legal technicalities. The cards are an efficient way of storing facts for my written reports. I tack them up on a large bulletin board above my desk and stare at them, telling myself the story as I perceive it. Amazing contradictions will come to light, sudden gaps, questions I’ve overlooked.I didn’t have many cards for Nikki Fife and I made no attempt to assess the information I had. I didn’t want to form a hypothesis too early for fear it would color the entire course of the investigation. It did seem clear that this was a murder where an alibi meant little or nothing. If you go to the trouble to substitute poison for the medication in someone’s antihistamine capsules, all you have to do afterward is sit back and wait. Unless you want to risk killing off others in the household, you have to be sure that only your intended victim takes that particular prescription, but there are plenty of pills that would satisfy that requirement: blood-pressure medication, antibiotics, maybe even sleeping pills. It doesn’t matter much as long as you have access to the supply. It might take your victim two days or two weeks but eventually he’d dose himself properly and you could probably even manufacture a reasonable facsimile of surprise and grief. The plan has a further advantage in that you don’t actually have to be there to shoot, bludgeon, hack up, or manually strangle your intended. Even where the motivation to kill is overpowering, it’d be pretty distasteful (one would think) to watch someone’s eyes bug out and listen to his or her last burbling cries. Also, when done in person there’s always that unsettling chance that the tables might be turned and you’d wind up on a slab in the morgue yourself.As methods go, this little oleander number was not half bad. In Santa Teresa, the shrub grows everywhere, sometimes ten feet tall with pink or white blossoms and handsome narrow leaves. You wouldn’t need to bother with anything so blatant as buying rat poison in a town where there are clearly no rats, and you wouldn’t have to sport a false mustache when you went into your local hardware store to ask for a garden pest control with no bitter aftertaste. In short, the method for killing Laurence Fife, and apparently Libby Glass as well, was inexpensive, accessible, and easy to use. I did have a couple of questions and I made notes of those before I turned out the light. It was well after midnight when I fell asleep.
