---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "B Is for Burglar - index_split_024.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - B Is for Burglar"
tags: ["back", "said", "like", "tillie", "door", "leonard", "think", "got", "going", "know", "right", "thought", "elaine", "car", "little", "andy", "went", "place", "mike", "come", "get", "old", "well", "left", "front"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/BIsforBurglar-indexsplit024html

---


Unknown
Chapter 22It was midmorning and I was suddenly starving to death. I left my car in front of the police station where it was parked and walked over to a little hole-in-the-wall called The Egg and I. I ordered my standard breakfast of bacon, scrambled eggs, toast, jelly, and orange juice, with coffee throughout. It’s the only meal I’m consistently fond of as it contains every element I crave: caffeine, salt, sugar, cholesterol, and fat. How can one resist? In California, with all the health nuts around, the very act of eating such a meal is regarded as a suicide attempt.I read the paper while I ate, catching up on local events. I had just gotten down to the second piece of rye toast when Pam Sharkey walked in with Daryl Hobbs, the manager at Lambeth and Creek. She caught sight of me and I waved. I didn’t give it everything I had. It was a casual offhand wave to indicate that I was a good joe and wasn’t going to lord it over her just because I bested her last time we met. Her expression faltered and she broke off eye contact, passing my table without a word. The snub was so pronounced that even Daryl seemed embarrassed. I was puzzled, but not cut to the quick, shrugging to myself philosophically. Maybe the aerospace engineer had turned out to be a jerk.When I finished breakfast, I paid the check and retrieved my car, popping over to the office to drop off the data I’d picked up from Jonah. I was unlocking my door when Vera stepped out into the corridor from California Fidelity.“Can I talk to you?” she said.“Sure. Come on it.” I pushed the office door open and she followed me in. “How are you?” I said, thinking this was a social call. She tucked a strand of auburn hair behind her ear, looking at me through the big pale blue-tinted lenses that made her eyes seem large and grave.“Uh, listen. Just a word to the wise,” she said uncomfortably. “All hell’s broken loose over that Leonard Grice business.”I blinked at her. “Like what?”“Pam Sharkey must have called him after you talked to her. I don’t know what she said to him, but he’s all up in arms. He’d hired an attorney who fired off a letter to CFI threatening to sue us within an inch of our lives. We’re talking millions.”“For what?”“They’re claiming slander, defamation of character, breach of contract, harassment. Andy’s livid. He says he had no idea you were involved. He says you weren’t authorized by California Fidelity or anybody else to go out there and ask questions... blah, blah, blah. You know how Andy gets when he’s on his high horse. He wants to see you the minute you come in.”“What is this? Leonard Grice hasn’t even filed a claim!”“Guess again. He submitted forms first thing Monday morning and he wants his money right now. The lawsuit was filed on top of that. Andy’s over there processing papers as fast as he can and he’s pissed. He’s told Mac he thinks we should terminate the whole arrangement with you after the jeopardy you put us in. The rest of us think he’s being a complete horse’s ass, but I thought you should know what’s going on.”“What’s the total on the claim itself?”“Twenty-five grand for the fire damage. That’s the face value on the homeowner’s policy and he has his losses itemized down to the penny. The life insurance isn’t at issue. I think he’s already collected some dinky little policy on her life-twenty-five hundred-and our records show he was paid that months ago. Kinsey, he’s out for bear and you’re it. Andy’s looking for someone to point a finger at so Mac doesn’t point a finger at him.”“Shit,” I said. I couldn’t think of anything else to say. The last thing in the world I needed right now was a dressing down by Andy Montycka, the CFI claims manager. Andy’s in his forties, conservative and insecure, a man whose prime obsessions are biting his fingernails and not making waves.“You want me to tell him you haven’t come in?” she asked.“Yeah, do that for me, if you would. Just let me check my phone messages and I’ll disappear,” I said. I unlocked the file and took out the folder on Elaine Boldt, looking back at Vera. “I’ll tell you something, Vera. This is hot. Leonard Grice has had six months to file a claim, but he hasn’t lifted a finger. Now, all of the sudden, he’s putting pressure on the insurance company to pay off. I’d like to know what prompted him.”“Hey, I gotta scoot before they come looking for me,” Vera said. “Just don’t cross Andy’s path today or you’ll pay for it.”I thanked her for the warning and told her I’d be in touch. She eased out into the hallway again, closing the door behind her. Belatedly, I felt my cheeks flush and my heart begin to thump. I got sent down to the principal’s office once in first grade for passing notes in class and I’ve never recovered from the horror of it. I was guilty as charged, but I’d never been in trouble in my life. There I was, a timid little child with skinny legs, so stricken with fear that I left the school and went home in tears. My aunt marched me right back and read everybody out while I sat on a little wooden chair in the hall and prayed for death. It’s hard to keep passing myself off as a grown-up when a piece of me is still six years old and utterly at the mercy of authority.A glance at my answering machine showed no messages. I locked up again and went down the front way so that I could avoid passing the glass double doors of California Fidelity. I got back in my car and drove over to Elaine’s old condominium. I wanted to have a brief talk with Tillie and let her know what was happening. I was turning right on Via Madrina when I glanced in the rearview mirror and realized there was some guy on a motorcycle roaring right up my tailpipe. I eased over slightly to let him pass and glanced back again. He was beeping away at me frantically. What had I done, run over his dog? I pulled over to the curb and he pulled up behind me, turning his bike off and booting his kickstand into place. He was wearing a shiny black jumpsuit, black gloves and boots, and a black helmet with a smoky face guard. I got out of my car and walked back toward him, watching him peel his helmet off as he approached. Oh hell, it was Mike. I should have guessed. The pink of his Mohawk seemed to be fading and I wondered whether he did his touch-ups with Rit dye, food coloring, or cooked beets. He was irked.“God, I been honking at you for blocks! How come you never called me back? I left a message on your machine on Monday,” he said.“Sorry. I didn’t realize it was you back there. I thought you said you were going to call me.”“Well, I tried to, but I kept getting your machine so I gave up. Where were you?”“Out of town. I just got back last night. Why? What’s happening?”He pulled his motorcycle gloves off and tucked them in his helmet, which he cradled in the crook of his arm. “I think my Uncle Leonard has a girl friend. I just thought you might like to know.”“Oh really? How’d you find out about that?”“I was moving that... uh... stash out of the shed at his old place and I saw him go into the building next door.”“The condo?”“Well yeah, I guess that’s what it is. That big apartment building.”“When was this?”“Sunday night. That’s why I called you so early Monday morning. At first, I wasn’t sure it was him. I kind of thought it was his car pulling up out front but it was almost dark and I couldn’t see that good. I figured he was coming over to the house for something and I was shovin’ shit in my duffel bag like crazy. Man, I didn’t know how I was going to explain what I was up to. Finally I was in such a panic, I whipped into the shed and pulled the door shut and watched through the crack. He ended up going over there instead.”“What makes you think he has a girl friend, though?”“Because I saw him with her. I didn’t have anything else to do, so I went across the street and hid behind a tree and waited until they came out. He was only in there five or ten minutes and then the lights went out, second floor left. Pretty soon they came out and shoved some stuff in the trunk and got in the car.”“Did you get a good look at her?”“Not really. It was hard to see ’em from where I was and they were walking kind of fast. Then when they got in the car they were all over each other. He nearly jumped her bones right there in the front seat. It was kind of weird. I mean, you usually don’t see people that age making out, you know what I mean? And anyway, I never thought about him like that. I figured he was just some old dried-out fart who couldn’t even get it up. I didn’t think he had it in him.”“Mike, the man is probably fifty-two years old. Would you knock that off! What did she look like? Had you ever seen her before?”Mike held his hand up to his chin. “She came up to about here on him. I noticed that. She had her hair tied back with a scarf-like a babushka or whatever you call ’em. I don’t think I’d seen her before. I mean, it wasn’t like I thought, Oh yeah, there’s old what’s-her-face or anything like that. She was just some babe.”“Look, do me a favor. Go find a pencil and paper and write all this down while it’s fresh in your mind. Make a note of the date and time and anything else you remember. You don’t have to say what you were doing around here. You can always claim you came over to check on the house or something. Will you do that?”“Okay, sure. What are you going to do?”“I haven’t made that part up yet,” I said.I got back in my car, and five minutes later I was being buzzed through from the lobby to Tillie’s apartment.She was waiting for me at the door and I followed her into the living room. She was wearing a pair of spectacles low on her nose and she peered at me over the rims. She took a seat in the rocker and picked up some needlework. It looked like a hunk of upholstery fabric printed with a scene of mountains and forest, deer grazing here and there, a stream gushing down through some rocks. She had wads of cotton and she was shoving them into the back of the cloth with a crochet hook. The deer were puffed out into three dimensions, surrounded by stitching, to produce a quilted effect.“What is that?” I asked, sitting down. “Are you stuffing it?”She smiled faintly. She’d finally let her new permanent wave have its way and her head was a nest of tight, frizzy curls the color of apricots. “That’s right, I am. It’s called trapunto. When I finish, I’ll have it blocked and framed. I do it for the church bazaar in the fall. This is cotton I save out of the tops of pill bottles, so next time you open some Tylenol or cold caps, you keep the packing for me. Sit down. I haven’t seen you for days. What have you been up to?”I gave her a summary of events since Friday, which was when I had seen her last. I did some censoring. I told her how I’d found the cat, but deleted the stash of drugs Mike kept in the shed next door. I told her about Aubrey Danziger and my confrontation later with Beverly, the suitcases, the trip to Florida, the threatened lawsuit, and Mike’s tale about Leonard Grice having a girl friend upstairs. That made her take her glasses off and click the stems against the frames.“I don’t believe it,” she said flatly. “Mike must have been high.”“Well, of course he was high, Tillie, but a little grass isn’t going to make him hallucinate.”“Then he’s inventing it.”“I’m just telling you what he told me,” I said.“Well, who in the world could it be? I’d be willing to guarantee Leonard wasn’t having an affair with any tenant of mine! And from his description, it would have been Elaine’s apartment, and that’s simply impossible.”“Oh come on, Tillie. Don’t be naive. It’s the perfect setup. Why couldn’t he have a woman over here?”“Because there’s no one in the building who fits that description.”“What about the woman in apartment 6? The one you thought might be up early the day your place got broken into.”“She’s seventy-five.”“But you have lots of other tenants.”“Young married couples. Kinsey, I have more single men who’d go for Leonard than I do single women.”“I’d buy that too. What about Elaine? Why couldn’t it be her?”Tillie shook her head stubbornly.“What about yourself?”Tillie laughed and patted herself on the chest. “Well, I’m flattered. I’d like to believe I’m still capable of hip-grinding out on the street, but he’s not exactly my type. Besides, Mike knows me. He’d have recognized me even in the dark.”I conceded that one. I truly couldn’t picture Tillie in a liplock with Leonard Grice. It just didn’t parse.“What about Elaine?” I persisted. “What if she and Leonard had a thing going and decided to eliminate his wife? She does the deed while he’s off at his sister’s place that night. She takes off for Florida a few days later and then lays low for the next six months, waiting for him to get his affairs in order so they can run away together into the sunset. Once they realizeI’m on to something, they step up the pace so they can blow town.”Tillie stared at me for a long time. “Then who is Pat Usher?”I shrugged again. “Maybe they enlisted her help and she’s covering for them.”“But who broke in here and why? I thought you were convinced Pat Usher did that.”I could feel myself getting exasperated. “I don’t have all the answers, Tillie! I’m just telling you it’s possible that he had some little tootsie stashed over here. Maybe it was Pat.”She didn’t say a word. She just put her glasses back on and started stuffing the mountain with cotton, making it bulge like Mount St. Helens before it blew.“Can I have the key to the apartment upstairs?”“Of course,” she said. “I’ll go too.”She put down her needlework and went over to the secretary, taking a set of keys out of the drawer. She handed me a bunch of bills while she was at it and I stuffed them in the back pocket of my jeans. It reminded me vaguely of something, but I couldn’t think what.She locked her apartment and we headed for the elevator.“You haven’t heard anyone walking around overhead?”She looked back at me. “Not at all, but this place is well built and someone could be upstairs without my hearing them. You really believe he was keeping someone up there?”“It does make sense,” I said. “With Elaine off the scene, it’s a perfect little love nest. Maybe Pat Usher found a way to get in. I’m sure she’s somewhere here in town. If she had access to Elaine’s place in Florida, why not this one too? By the way, were you here Sunday night?”She shook her head. “I was at a church social and didn’t get home until shortly after ten.”The elevator door opened at the second floor and Tillie moved down the corridor to the left, talking to me over her shoulder. She reached Elaine’s front door and turned the key in the lock.“I can’t believe anyone’s been here,” she said as we went in.She was wrong, of course. Wim Hoover, the tenant from number 10, was sprawled in the entryway with a bullet hole just behind his right ear. The air smelled of stale cigarette smoke and the fetid perfume wafting up from his souring flesh. He’d been dead for at least three days. Tillie paled and went down to her place to call the police.
