---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "B Is for Burglar - index_split_021.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - B Is for Burglar"
tags: ["like", "one", "could", "julia", "well", "way", "maybe", "got", "said", "bag", "end", "someone", "door", "elaine", "back", "know", "pat", "room", "looked", "set", "open", "knew", "face", "look", "left"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/BIsforBurglar-indexsplit021html

---


Unknown
Chapter 19It was drizzling and the temperature was already in the seventies at 4:56 A.M. EST when we touched down. It was still dark outside, but the airport was filled with the flat light and artificial chill of a space station orbiting a hundred and ten miles out. Dawn travelers walked purposefully down deserted corridors while doors shushed open and shut automatically and the paging system seemed to drone on and on without hope of response. For all I knew, the whole operation was mechanical, running itself at that hour without any help from humankind.The TWA baggage-service office didn’t open until nine, so I had time to kill. I hadn’t brought any luggage of my own, just a big canvas bag where I kept a toothbrush and all the odds and ends of ordinary life, including clean underpants. I never go anywhere without a toothbrush and clean underpants. I went into the women’s room to freshen up. I washed my face and ran my wet fingers through my hair, noting how sallow my skin looked with the fluorescent lights overhead. There was a woman behind me, changing the diaper on one of those oversized babies who looks like a solemn adult with flushed cheeks. The child kept his eyes pinned on me gravely while his mother attended to him. Sometimes cats look at me that way, as though we’re foreign agents sending silent signals to one another in an out of the way meeting place.I paused at a stand and picked up a newspaper. There was a coffee shop open and I bought scrambled eggs, bacon, toast, and juice, taking my time about breakfast while I read a human-interest story about a man who’d left all his money to a mynah bird. I can’t cope with the front section before seven A.M.At quarter to nine, having walked the airport from end to end twice, I stationed myself near Baggage Claim with a portable cart I’d rented for a buck. I could see Elaine’s bags, neatly lined up at on end of the locked glass-fronted cabinets. It looked as if someone had hauled them out from the bottom of the pile in readiness. Finally, a middle-aged man in a TWA uniform, with a big set of jangling keys, unlocked the small cubicle and started turning on lights. It looked like the opening curtain of a one-act play with a modest set.I presented myself and the baggage-claim tags and then followed him out to the storage cabinets and waited while he extracted the suitcases and stacked them on the cart. I expected him to ask for identification, but apparently he didn’t care who I was. Maybe abandoned bags are like litters of unwanted kittens. He was just grateful to have someone take them off his hands.When the Penny-Car Rental desk opened, I rented a compact car. I had given Julia a call the night before so she knew I was flying in. All I needed to do now was find the highway again and drive north. Once outside, I pushed the cart toward the slot where the rental car was parked. The drizzle settled on my skin like a layer of silk. The morning air was hot and close, smelling of rain and jet exhaust. I loaded the bags in the trunk of the car and headed toward Boca. It wasn’t until I reached the condominium parking lot, unloading the suitcases one by one, that I realized all four were locked and I had no key. Well, how very cute. Maybe Julia would have a plan. I lugged them over to the elevator and went up to the third floor, hauling them to Julia’s front door in two trips.I knocked and waited a long interval while Julia thumped her way to the front door with her cane, calling encouragement.“I’m coming. Don’t give up. Six more feet to go and I’m bearing down hard.”On my side of the door, I smiled, peering over at Elaine’s apartment. There was no sign of life. Even the welcome mat had been taken inside or thrown out, leaving a square of fine sand that had filtered through the bristles.Julia’s door opened. The dowager’s hump sat between her shoulder blades like a weight, forcing her to bend with its burden. She seemed to be staring at my waist, tilting her head of dandelion fuzz to one side so she could peer up at me. Her skin seemed as sheer as rubber, pulled over her hands like surgical gloves. I could see veins and broken capillaries,her knuckles as knotted as rope. Age was making her transparent, crushing her from both ends like a can of soda pop.“Well, Kinsey! I knew that was you. I’ve been awake since six this morning, looking forward to this. Come on in.”She hobbled to one side, making way for me. I set the four suitcases inside the door and closed it after me. She tapped one with her cane. “I recognize those.”“Unfortunately, they’re locked.”Each of the four bags apparently had a combination lock, the numbers arranged on a dial embedded in the metal catch.“We’ll have to do some detective work,” she said with satisfaction. “You want coffee first? How was your flight?”“I’d love some,” I said. “The flight wasn’t bad.”Julia’s apartment was crowded with antiques: a peculiar mix of Victorian pieces and Oriental furnishings. There was a huge carved cherry sideboard with a marble top, a black horsehair sofa, an intricate ivory screen, jade figures, a platform rocker, two cinnabar lamps, Persian rugs, a pier-glass mirror in a dark mahogany frame, a piano with a fringed shawl across the top, lace curtains, wall hangings of embroidered silk. A big portable television set with a twenty-five-inch screen loomed on the far side of the room surrounded by family photographs in heavy silver frames. The television set was turned off, its blank gray face oddly compelling in a room so filled with memorabilia. The only sound in the apartment was the steady ticking of a grandfather clock that sounded like someone tapping on Formica with a set of drumsticks.I moved out to the kitchen, poured coffee for us both, and carried it back to the living room, the cups rattling slightly in the saucers like the tremor of a minor California earthquake. “Are these family antiques? Some of the pieces are beautiful.”Julia smiled, waggling her cane. “I’m the last person alive in my family so I’ve inherited all this by default. I was the youngest in a family of eleven children and my mother said I was fractious. She always swore I’d never get a thing, but I just kept my mouth shut and waited it out. Sure enough, she died, my father died. I had eight sisters and two brothers and they all died. Little by little, it all drifted down to me, though I hardly have a place to put anything at this point. Eventually you have to give it all away. You start with a ten-room house and finally you find yourself stranded in a nursing home with space for one night table and a candlestick. Not that I intend to let that happen to me.”“You’ve got a ways to go yet anyway from what I can see.”“Well, I hope so. I’m going to hold out as long as I can and then I’ll lock and bar the door and do myself in, if nature doesn’t take me first. I’m hoping I’ll die in my bed one night. It’s the bed I was born in and I think it’d be nice to end up there. Have you a large family?”“No, just me. I was raised by an aunt, but she died ten years ago.”“Well then, we’re in the same boat. Restful, isn’t it.”“That’s one way to put it,” I said.“I came from a family of shriekers and face slappers. They all threw things. Glasses, plates, tables, chairs, anything that came to hand. The air was always filled with flying missiles-objects rocketing from one end of the room to the other with howls on contact. This was mostly girls, you know, but all of us had deadly aim. I had a sister knock me out of my high chair once with a grapefruit thrown like a curve ball, oatmeal flying everywhere. Eulalie, her name was. Now that I look back on it, I see we were common as mud, but effective. We all got what we wanted in life and no one ever accused us of being helpless or fainthearted. Well now. Let’s tackle those bags. If worse comes to worst, we can always hurl them off the balcony. I’m sure they’ll open when they hit the pavement down below.”We approached the problem as though it were a code to be broken. Julia’s theory, which proved to be correct, was that Elaine would have come up with a combination of numbers she already had in her life somewhere. Her street address, zip code, telephone number, social security, birthdate. Each of us chose one group of digits and started to work on separate bags. I hit it the third time around with the last four numbers on her social-security card. All four suitcases were coded with the same number, which simplified the task.We opened them on the living-room floor. They were filled with exactly what one would expect: clothing, cosmetics, costume jewelry, shampoo, deodorant, slippers, bathing suit, but packed in a jumble the way they do in movies when the wife leaves the husband in the middle of a vicious snit. The hangers were still on the hanging clothes, garments folded over and bunched in, with the shoes tossed on top. It looked as if drawers had been turned upside down and emptied into the largest of the bags. Julia had hobbled over to the rocker and she sat there now, propping herself up with her cane as though she were a unwieldy plant. I sat down on the horsehair sofa, staring at the suitcases. I looked at Julia uneasily.“I don’t like this,” I said. “From what I know of Elaine, she was almost compulsively neat. You should have seen the way she left her place... everything just so... clean, tidy, tucked in. Does she strike you as the type who’d pack this way?”“Not unless she were in a fearful hurry,” Julia said.“Well actually, she might have been, but I still don’t think she’d pack like this.”“What’s on your mind? What do you think it means?”I told her about the double set of plane tickets and the layover in St. Louis and any other facts I thought might pertain. It was nice to have someone to try ideas on. Julia was bright and she liked to pick at knots the same way I did.“I’m not convinced she ever got here,” I said. “We only have Pat Usher’s word for it anyway and neither of us set much store by that. Maybe she got off the plane in St. Louis for some reason.”“Without her luggage? And you said she left her passport behind too, so what could she have done with herself?’“Well, she did have that lynx coat,” I said, “which she could have pawned or sold.” I had one of those little nagging thoughts on the subject, but I couldn’t bring it into focus for the moment.Julia waved dismissively. “I don’t believe she’d sell her coat, Kinsey. Why would she do that? She has lots of money. Stocks, bonds, mutual funds. She wouldn’t need to pawn anything.”I chewed on that one. She was right, of course. “I keep wondering if she’s dead. The luggage got here, but maybe she never made it. Maybe she’s in a morgue somewhere with a tag on her toe.”“You think someone lured her off the plane and killed her?”I wagged my head back and forth, not wholly convinced. “I don’t know. It’s possible. It’s also possible she never made the trip at all.”“I thought you told me someone saw her get on the plane. The cab driver you talked about.”“That wasn’t really a positive identification. I mean, a cab driver picks up a fare and the woman claims she’s Elaine Boldt. He never saw her before in his life, so who knows? He just takes her word for it, like we all do. How do you know I’mKinsey Millhone? Because I say I am. Someone might have posed as her just to establish a trail.”“What for?”“Well now, that I don’t know. We’ve got a couple of women who might have pulled it off. Her sister Beverly for one.”“And Pat Usher for another,” Julia said.“Pat did benefit from Elaine’s being off the scene. She gets a rent-free condo in Boca for months.”“That’s the first time I ever heard of anyone murdered for room and board,” she said tartly.I smiled. I knew we were floundering, but maybe we’d stumble onto something. I could have used a break at that point. “Did Pat ever leave that forwarding address she promised?”Julia shook her head. “Charmaine says she left one, but it was humbug. She packed and took off the same day you were here and nobody’s seen her since.”“Oh shit. I knew she’d do that.”“Well, it wasn’t anything you could have prevented,” she said charitably.I leaned my head back against the sofa frame, playing mind games. “It could have been Beverly too, you know. Maybe Bev bumped her off in the ladies’ room at the St. Louis airport.”“Or killed her in Santa Teresa and impersonated her from that point on. Maybe she was the one who packed the bags and took the plane.”“Try it the other way,” I said. “Think about Pat. I mean, what if Pat Usher were a stranger to Elaine, just someone she met on the plane. Maybe they started talking and Pat realized-” I dropped that idea when I saw the expression on Julia’s face. “It does sound pretty lame,” I said.“Oh, well-no harm done in speculating. Maybe Pat knew her in Santa Teresa and followed her from there.”I ran that around in my head. “Well, yeah. I guess it could be. Tillie says she heard from Elaine-at least, she assumed it was Elaine-by postcard until March, but I guess somebody could have faked that too.”I filled her in on my conversations with Aubrey and Beverly and right in the middle of it, my memory kicked in; one of those wonderful little mental jolts, like a quick electrical shock when a plug’s gone bad. “Oh wait, I just remembered something. Elaine got a bill from some furrier here in Boca. What if we could track him down and find out if he’s seen the coat? That might give us a lead.”“What furrier? We have quite a few.”“I’d have to check with Tillie. Can I make a call to California? If we can track down the coat, maybe we can get a line on her.”Julia wagged the cane toward the telephone. Within minutes, I’d gotten Tillie on the line and told her what I needed.“Well, you know that bill got stolen along with the rest, but I just got another one. Hold on and I’ll see what it says.” She put the receiver down and went to fetch the mail.She got back on the line. “She’s being dunned. It’s a second overdue notice from a place called Jacques-seventy-six dollars for storage and two hundred dollars for having the coat recut. Wonder why she’d do that? There’s a little happy face drawn by hand: ‘Thanks for your business’-followed by a sad face: ‘Hope the delay in payment is just an oversight.’ A few more bills have come in too. Let me see what those look like.”I could hear Tillie ripping open envelopes on her end of the line.“Oops. Well, these are all overdue. It looks like she’s run up a lot of charges. Let’s see. Oh my. Visa, MasterCard. The last date on these is about ten days ago, but I guess that was just the end of the billing period. They’re asking her not to use her cards until she’s paid the balances down.”“Does it indicate where she was when the purchases were made? Was she in Florida somewhere?”“Yes, it looks like Boca Raton and Miami for the most part, but you can check them yourself when you get back. Now that I’ve had the locks changed, they should be safe.”“Thanks, Tillie. Can you give me the furrier’s address?”I made a note of it and got directions from Julia. I left her and went back down to the parking lot. The sky was an ominous gray and thunder rumbled in the distance like movers rolling a piano down a wooden ramp. It was hot and still, the light a harsh white, making the grass turn phosphorescent green. I was hoping I could take care of business before the downpour caught up with me.Jacques was located in the middle of an elegant shopping plaza, shaded with latticework overhead and planted with delicate birches in big pale blue urns. Tiny Italian lights had been threaded through the branches, and in the prestorm gloom they twinkled like an early Christmas. The storefronts were done in a dove-gray granite and the pigeons strutting across the pavement looked as if they’d been placed there purely for their decorative effect. Even the sound they made was refined, a low, churring murmur that rode on the morning air like cash being riffled in a merchant’s hands.The window display at Jacques had been artfully done. A golden sable coat had been tossed carelessly across a dune of fine white sand against a sky-blue backdrop. Tufts of sea oats were growing on the crest of the sand and a hermit crab had crossed the surface, leaving a narrow track that looked like an embroidery stitch. It was like a little moment frozen in time: a woman-someone reckless and rich-had come down to the shore, had shrugged aside this luscious fur so that she could plunge naked into the sea-or perhaps she was making love to someone on the far side of the dune. Standing there, I could have sworn I saw the grasses bending in a nonexistent wind and I could almost smell the trail of perfume she’d left in her wake.I pushed the door open and went in. If I’d had money and believed in wearing furry creatures on my back, I’d have laid down thousands in that place.
