---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "B Is for Burglar - index_split_008.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - B Is for Burglar"
tags: ["like", "said", "looked", "back", "elaine", "maybe", "something", "eye", "grice", "dolan", "get", "away", "one", "first", "look", "see", "hand", "front", "lieutenant", "head", "fire", "went", "face", "want", "took"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/BIsforBurglar-indexsplit008html

---


Unknown
Chapter 6I stayed in the shower until the hot water ran out and then I got dressed, pulling on jeans and a cotton sweater, zipping boots up to my knees. I plopped on a soft leather hat with a wide brim and studied the effect in the bathroom mirror. It would do.I headed for the office first and wrote a letter to Beverly Danziger, terminating our professional relationship. I was pretty sure she’d be thoroughly disconcerted by that and it gave me a nice feeling. I went next door to the offices of California Fidelity Insurance and made a photocopy of my itemized bill to her, marked it “final,” and tucked it in with the letter and a copy of my final report. Then I headed over to the police station on Floresta and talked to a Sergeant Jonah Robb about a missing persons report on Elaine Boldt, watching his fingers fly across the keys as he typed the information I gave him on the form.He looked like he was in his late thirties, his body compact in his uniform. He was maybe twenty pounds overweight, not an unattractive amount, but something he’d have to cope with soon. Dark hair trimmed very short, smooth rounded face, a dent in his left ring finger where he’d recently worn a wedding ring. He shot a look at me at that point. Blue eyes flecked with green.“Anything you want to add to this?”“Her next-door neighbor down in Florida is sending me a plane ticket she apparently used. I’ll take a look at it and see if it tells us anything else. A friend of hers named Pat Usher swears up and down she spent a couple of days with Elaine Boldt before she went off to Sarasota, but I don’t believe much of what she says.”“She’ll probably show up. They usually do.” He took a file folder out and inserted a clamp. “You used to be a cop, didn’t you?”“Briefly,” I said. “But I couldn’t make it work. Too rebellious I guess. What about you? How long have you been on the force?”“Eight years. I was a detail man before that. Sold drugs for Smith, Kline, and French. I got tired of driving around in a late-model car, hitting up on doctors. It was all hype anyway. Just like selling anything else. Sickness is big business.” He looked down at his hands, then back at me. “Well. Anyway, I hope you find your lady. We’ll do what we can.”“Thanks,” I said, “I’ll give you a call later in the week.”I picked up my bag and moved toward the door.“Hey,” he said.I looked back.“I like the hat.”I smiled.As I passed the front counter on my way out, I caught sight of Lieutenant Dolan in Identification and Records, talking to a young black clerk in uniform. His glance slid past me and then came back with a look of recognition. He broke off his conversation with her and ambled over to the counter. Lieutenant Dolan is in his fifties, with a square, baggy face and a bald spot he tries to disguise with tricky arrangements of what hair remains. It’s the only evidence of any vanity on his part and it cheers me up somehow. I imagine him standing in front of his bathroom mirror every morning, trying to cope with the creeping expanse of naked scalp. He was wearing rimless bifocals, apparently new, because he couldn’t quite get me in range. He peered at me first from above the little half-moons and then from below. Finally, he slipped the glasses off and tucked them in the pocket of his rumpled gray suit.“Hello, Kinsey. I haven’t see you since the shooting. How are you doing with that?”I felt myself flush with discomfort. I’d killed someone in the course of an investigation two weeks before and I was studiously avoiding the subject. The moment he mentioned it I realized how completely I’d willed it away. It hadn’t even crossed my mind and his reference to it seemed as startling as that dream where you find yourself stark-naked in a public“I’m fine,” I said briefly, breaking off eye contact. In a flash, I saw the beach at night, that slat of light when the big trash bin I was hiding in was opened and I looked up. My little semiautomatic had jumped in my hand like some kind of reflex test and I’d squeezed off more rounds than were really necessary for getting the job done. The blast in that confined space had been deafening and my ears had been ringing ever since, a high-pitched hiss like gas escaping from a faulty valve. In a flash, the image was gone again and Lieutenant Dolan was standing there, maybe wishing he’d kept his mouth shut judging from the look on his face.My relationship to Con Dolan has always been adversarial, remote, based on grudging mutual respect. He doesn’t like private investigators as a rule. He feels we should mind our own business, whatever that is, and leave law enforcement to professionals like him. My fantasy has always been that one day we’ll sit down and exchange criminal gossip like little old ladies, but now that he’d introduced a personal note, I could feel myself withdraw, disconcerted by the shift. When I met his eyes again, his gaze was flat, his expression bland.I shook my head. “Sorry,” I said, “you took me by surprise. I guess I haven’t quite sorted it through.” Actually what took me by surprise was realizing I’d killed someone and didn’t much care. No, that wasn’t true. I did care, but if my life was threatened, I knew I’d do it again. I’d always believed I was a good person. Now I didn’t know what “good” meant. Surely good people didn’t kill other human beings, so where did that put me?He said, “What are you doing down here?”I shook my head again slightly and focused on the subject at hand. “I just filed a missing persons report for a client,” I said. I hesitated, wondering if he’d encountered Elaine during his investigation of the incident next door. “Did you handle the Grice homicide back in January of this year?”He stared at me, his face closing up like sea anemone. Apparently he had. “What about it?”“I wondered if you interviewed a woman named Elaine Boldt. She lives in the condominium next door.”“I remember the name,” he said carefully. “I spoke to her myself by phone. She was supposed to come down and talk to us, but I don’t think she ever showed up. She your client?”“She’s the one I’m looking for.”“How long she been gone?”I detailed the information I had and I could see him run through the possibilities in the same way I had. In Santa Teresa County, some four thousand persons, male and female, are reporting missing every year. Most are found again but a few remain somewhere out in the ether.He shoved his hands down in his pockets, rocking on his heels. “When she does turn up, tell her I want her down here for an interview,” he said.I was startled. “That case hasn’t been wrapped up yet?”“No, and I won’t discuss it with you either. Department policy,” he said. His favorite phrase.“Jesus, Lieutenant Dolan. Big deal. Who asked you?” I knew he was protecting the integrity of his case, but I get tired of his being such a tight-ass. He thinks he is entitled to any information I have, while he never gives me a thing. I was hot and he knew it.He smiled at me. “I just thought I’d head off that tendency of yours to stick your nose where it doesn’t belong.”“I’ll help you out sometime too,” I said. “And meanwhile, if you want to talk to Elaine Boldt, you can find her yourself.”I pushed away from the counter, heading toward the exit.“Well, you don’t need to take that attitude,” he called. I glanced back. He was looking entirely too self-satisfied for my taste.“Right,” I said and pushed on out the double doors.I came out of the police station into the flat overcast day and stood for a moment, collecting myself. The man gets to me. No doubt about it. I took a deep breath.The temperature was in the mid-sixties. Pale remnants of sunlight shone through the clouds, tinting the neighborhood with lemon-colored light. The shrubbery had taken on a chartreuse glow and the grass seemed dry and artificial from the lack of moisture. It hadn’t rained for weeks and the month of June had been a monotonous succession of foggy mornings, hazy afternoons, and chilly nights. Actually, Lieutenant Dolan had opened up a possibility and I wondered if Elaine’s departure was coincidental with the murder of Marty Grice or connected in some way. If the vandalism at Tillie’s was related, why not this? Could she have taken off to avoid the lieutenant’s questioning? I thought it might help to pin down some dates.I headed over to the newspaper office six blocks away and file clips on Marty Grice’s death. There was only one clip, a small article, maybe two inches long, stuck back on page eight of local news, dated January 4.+++BURGLAR KILLS HOUSEWIFE,THEN BURNS BODY,POLICE SAYA Santa Teresa housewife was bludgeoned to death during an apparent burglary in her west-side residence early last night. According to homicide detectives, Martha Renee Grice, 45, of 2095 Via Madrina, was struck repeatedly with a blunt instrument and doused with flammable liquid. The victim’s body was discovered, badly burned, in the foyer of the partially destroyed single-family dwelling after Santa Teresa fire fighters battled the blaze for thirty minutes. The fire was first spotted by neighbors at 9:55 P.M. Two adjacent homes were evacuated, but no other injuries were reported. Details of the arson were withheld pending further investigation.+++The crime seemed pretty spectacular to get such small play. Maybe the cops hadn’t had much to go on and had tried to minimize the coverage. That might explain Dolan’s attitude. Maybe he wasn’t being uncooperative. Maybe he had no evidence. Nothing makes a cop any tighter than that. I took down the pertinent information in my notebook and then I walked over to the public library and checked the Santa Teresa city directory that had come out last spring. Martha Grice was listed at 2095 Via Madrina along with a Leonard Grice, bldg. contrctr. I assumed he was the husband. The newspaper account had made no mention of him and I wondered where he’d been when the whole thing went down. The directory listed the neighbors next door at 2093 as Orris and May Snyder. His occupation was “retired” but the directory didn’t say from what. I jotted down the names and the telephone number. It might be interesting to see if I could find what went on and whether Elaine might have seen something she didn’t want to talk about. The more I thought about it, the better I liked that idea. It gave me a whole new line to pursue.I retrieved my car from the lot behind my office and circled back around to Via Madrina. It was now twelve o’clock straight up and high-school students were spilling out onto the streets; girls in jeans, short white socks and high heels, guys in chinos and flannel shirts. The wholesome California sorts outnumbered the punkers about three to one, but most of them looked like they’d been dressed out of ragbags. Some kids were wearing outrageous designer jumpsuits and some wore whole outfits in camouflage fabric as though prepared for an air attack. About half the girls sported three to four earrings per ear. In hairstyles, they seemed to fancy the wet look, or ponytails sticking up out of the sides of their heads like waterspouts.As I pulled up in front of the condominium, a cluster of six girls were clumping down the sidewalk, smoking clove-scented cigarettes. Shoulder pads and green nail polish, dark red lipstick. They looked like they were on their way to a USO dance in 1943.I caught just a fragment of their conversation.“So I’m all ‘What the fuck did you think I was talking about, dick-head?!’ and he goes like ‘Hey, well, I never did anything to you, bitch, so I don’t know what your problem is.’”I smiled to myself, and then looked over at the Grice house with interest. It was white frame, a story and a half, with a squat L-shaped porch across the front, resting on fat redbrick pillars topped with short pyramids of wood. It looked as if it had been jacked up somehow and might, at any moment, collapse. Most of the porch roof had burned away. The yard was scrappy and a row of pale pink-and-blue hydrangea bushes crowded the porch, still looking browned and wilted from the fire, though new growth was bravely showing through. The front window frames on the first floor were capped with lintels of black soot where the fire had licked the framing. A sign had been posted warning trespassers away. I wondered if the salvage crew had already gone in to clean up. I was hoping not, but I was probably out of luck on that. I wanted to see the house as it had been on the night of the fire. I also wanted to chat with Leonard Grice, but there was no indication whatever that the house was inhabited. Even from the street, I could still pick up the six-month-old cologne of charred wood and grinding damp where the firemen’s hoses had penetrated every seam and crevice.As I headed toward Elaine’s condominium, I spotted someone coming out of a small wooden utility shed in the Grices’ backyard. I paused to watch. A kid maybe seventeen. He had a Mohawk haircut, three inches of what looked like bright pink hay with a path mown on either side. He had his head down, his hands shoved into the pockets of his army fatigues. With a start, I realized I’d seen him before-from Elaine’s front window the first time I searched her place. He’d been standing in the street below, rolling a joint at a leisurely pace. Now what was he up to? I veered, picking up my pace so my path would intersect his just about at the property line. “Hello,” I said.He looked up at me, startled, flashing the sort of polite smile kids reserve for adults. “Hi.”His face didn’t match the rest of him. His eyes were deepset, a jade green set off by dark lashes and dark eyebrows that feathered together at the bridge of his nose. His skin was clear, his smile engaging, slightly snaggle-toothed. He had a dimple in his left cheek. He glanced to one side, moving past me. I reached out and caught him by the sleeve. “Can I talk to you?”He looked at me and then quickly back over his shoulder. “You talking to me?”“Yes. I saw you coming out of that shed back there. You live around here?”“What? Oh. Sure, couple of blocks away. This is my Uncle Leonard’s house. I’m supposed to check and make sure nobody’s bothering his stuff.” His voice was light, almost feminine.“What stuff is that?”The jade-green eyes had settled on me with curiosity. He smiled and his whole face brightened. “You a cop or something?”“Private investigator,” I said. “My name is Kinsey Millhone.”“Wow, that’s great,” he said. “I’m Mike. You guarding the place or something like that?”I shook my head. “I’m looking into another matter, but I heard about the fire. Your aunt was the one who was killed?” The smile flickered. “Yeah, right. Jesus, that was terrible. I mean, her and me were never close, but my uncle really got messed up over that. He’s a fuckin’ basket case. Oh. Sorry ‘bout that,” he said sheepishly. “He’s like vegged out or something, staying with this other aunt of mine.” “Can you tell me how to get in touch with him?” “Well, my aunt’s name is Lily Howe. I don’t remember the number offhand, or I’d help you out.”He was beginning to blush and the effect was odd. Pink hair, green eyes, rosy cheeks, green army fatigues. He looked like a birthday cake, innocent and festive somehow. He ran a hand across his hair, which was standing straight up on top like a whisk broom.I wondered why he was so ill at ease. “What were you doing back there?”He glanced back at the shed with an embarrassed shrug. “I was checking the padlock. I get like really paranoid, you know? I mean, the guy pays me ten bucks a month and I like to do right by him. Did you want something else? Because I have to go grab some lunch and get back to class, okay?”“Sure. Maybe I’ll see you later.”“Right. That’d be great. Anytime.” He smiled at me again and then moved away, walking backward at first, his eyes latched to mine, turning finally so that I was watching the narrow back and slim hips. There was something disturbing about him, but I couldn’t think what it was. Something didn’t jibe. That goody-two-shoes helpfulness and the look in his eyes. Artless and cunning... a kid whose conscience is clear because he doesn’t have one. Maybe I’d check him out too, as long as I was at it. I went into the condominium courtyard.
