---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "C Is for Corpse - index_split_011.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - C Is for Corpse"
tags: ["like", "back", "time", "got", "bobby", "body", "know", "said", "made", "one", "kelly", "sure", "really", "room", "thought", "door", "two", "still", "never", "might", "life", "man", "fraker", "keep", "eye"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/CIsforCorpse-indexsplit011html

---


Unknown
Chapter 10Once Dr. Fraker left, Kelly Borden got out a spray bottle of disinfectant that he began to squirt on the stainless-steel counters, wiping everything down methodically. I wasn’t sure he really needed to do it, but it allowed him to keep his eyes averted. It was a polite way of ignoring me, but I didn’t object. I used the time to circle the room, peering into glass-fronted cabinets filled with scalpels, forceps, and grim little hacksaws.“I thought there’d be more bodies,” I said.“In there.”I glanced over at the door he’d come through. “Can I look?”He shrugged.I crossed and opened the door, which had a temperature gauge beside it reading forty degrees. The room, about the size of my apartment, was lined with fiberglass pallets arranged in tiers like bizarre bunk beds. There were eight bodies in evidence, most wrapped in the same yellowing plastic, through which I could discern, in some cases, arms and legs and seeping injuries, blood and body fluids condensing on the surface of the plastic wrap. Two bodies were covered with sheets. An old woman, lying on the pallet nearest me, was naked, as still as wood and looking faintly dehydrated. A dramatic Y-shaped cut had been made down the middle of her body, sewn back in big clumsy stitches, like a chicken, stuffed and trussed. Her breasts were splayed outward like old beanbags and her pubic area was almost as hairless as a young girl’s. I wanted to cover her, but what was the point? She was beyond cold, beyond pain, modesty, or sex. I watched her chest, but there was no reassuring rise and fall. Death was beginning to seem like a parlor trick-how long can you hold your breath? I felt myself breathing deeply again, not wanting to participate. I closed the door, stepping back into the warmth of the autopsy room. “How many can you accommodate?”“Fifty, maybe, in a pinch. I’ve never seen more than eight or so.”“I thought most people went straight to a mortuary.”“They do if they’ve died of natural causes. We get everything else. Homicide victims, suicides, accidents, any death of a suspicious or unusual nature. Most of those are autopsied and then released to a mortuary in a relatively short period of time. Of the ten we have on hand, some are indigents. A couple of’em are John Does we’re holding in hopes we’ll get a positive I. D. Sometimes burial arrangements are pending so we hold a body for the next of kin. Two we’ve had around for years. Franklin and Eleanor. Like mascots.”I crossed my arms, feeling chilled, shifting the subject back to the living. “Do you know Bobby very well?” I asked. I turned and leaned against the wall, watching him polish the faucet handles on the stainless-steel sink.“I hardly know him at all. We worked different shifts.”“How long have you worked out here?”“Five years.”“What else do you do with your time?”He paused, looking up at me. He didn’t seem to like the personal questions, but he was too polite to say so. “I’m a musician. I play jazz guitar.”I stared at him for a minute, hesitating. “Have you ever heard of Daniel Wade?”“Sure. He was a local jazz pianist. Everybody’s heard of him. He hasn’t been around town in years, though. He a friend of yours?”I moved away from the wall, taking up my rounds. “I was married to him once.”“Married to him?”“That’s right.” There were some jars filled with a brackish liquid in which body parts were marinating. I wondered if there might be a pickled heart tucked in among all the livers, kidneys, and spleens.Kelly went back to his work. “Incredible musician,” he remarked in a tone of voice that was part caution, part respect.“That he is,” I said, smiling at the irony. I never talked about this stuff and it seemed odd to be doing it in an autopsy room to a morgue attendant in surgical greens.“What happened to him?” Kelly asked.“Nothing. He was in New York last I heard. Still playing his music, still on drugs.”He shook his head. “God, the talent that guy has. I never really knew him, but I used to see him every chance I got. I can’t understand why he never got anywhere.”“The world is full of talented people.”“Yeah, but he’s smarter than most-At least from what I heard.”“Too bad I wasn’t as smart as he was. I could have saved myself a lot of grief I said. Actually, the marriage, though brief, had been the best few months of my life, Daniel had the face of an angel back then,.. clear blue eyes, a cloud of yellow curls. He always reminded me of some artist’s rendering of a Catholic saint-lean and beautiful, ascetic-looking, with elegant hands and an unassuming air. He exuded innocence. He just couldn’t be faithful, couldn’t lay off” the drugs, couldn’t stay in one place. He was wild and funny and corrupt, and if he came back today, I can’t swear I’d turn him down, whatever he asked.I let the conversation lapse and Kelly, prompted by the silence, finally spoke up.“What’s Bobby doing these days?”I glanced back at him. He had perched himself on a tall wooden stool, the rag and disinfectant on the counter to his left.“He’s still trying to get his life back together,” I said. “He works out every day. I don’t know what else he does with his time. I don’t suppose you have any idea what was going on back then, do you?”“What difference does it make at this point?”“He says he was in some kind of danger, but his memory’s shot. Until I fill in the gaps, he’s probably still in trouble.”“How come?”“If somebody tried to kill him once, they may try again.”“Why haven’t they done that so far?”“I don’t know. Maybe they think they’re safe.”He looked at me. “That’s weird.”“He never confided in you?”Kelly shrugged, his manner ever so slightly guarded again. “We only worked together a couple of times. I was off on vacation for part of the time he was here, and the rest of it, I was on days while he did graveyard shift.”“Is there any chance he might have left a small red leather address book out here?”“I doubt it. None of us even have lockers for our stuff.”I took a business card out of my wallet. “Will you give me a call if you have any ideas? I’d like to know what was going on back then and I know Bobby’d appreciate some help.”“Sure.”I went in search of Dr. Fraker, passing Nuclear Medicine, the nursing offices, and the offices of a group of local radiologists, all in the basement. I ran into Fraker just as he was coming downstairs again.“All through?” he said.“Yes, are you?”“I’ve got a ‘post’ at noon, but we can find an empty office and talk if you like.”I shook my head. “I don’t have any other questions for the moment. I may want to check back with you at some point.”“Absolutely. Just give me a call.”“Thanks. I’ll do that.”I sat in my car in the parking lot, making notes on some three-by-five index cards I keep in the glove compartment: date, time, and names of the two people I’d talked to. I thought Dr. Fraker was a good resource, even though the interview with him hadn’t yielded much. Kelly Borden hadn’t been much help either, but at least it was an avenue I’d explored. Sometimes the noes are just as important as the yeses because they represent cul-de-sacs, allowing you to narrow your field of inquiry until you stumble into the heart of the maze. In this case, I had no idea where that might lie or what might be hidden there. I checked my watch. It was 11:45 and I thought about lunch. I have a hard time eating meals when I should. Either I’m not hungry when I’m supposed to be or I’m hungry and not in a place where I can stop and eat. It becomes a weight-control maneuver, but I’m not sure it’s good for my health. I started my car and headed toward town.I went back to the health-food restaurant where Bobby and I had eaten lunch on Monday. I was really hoping to run into him, but he was nowhere in sight. I ordered a longevity salad that was supposed to take care of 100 percent of my nutritional needs for life. What the waitress brought me was a plate piled with weeds and seeds, topped with a zesty pink dressing with specks. It didn’t taste nearly as yummy as a Quarter Pounder with cheese, but I did feel virtuous, knowing I had all that chlorophyll coursing through my veins.When I got back in my car, I checked my teeth in the rearview mirror to make sure they weren’t flecked with alfalfa sprouts. I prefer not to interview people looking like I’ve just been grazing out in some field. I leafed through my notebook for Rick Bergen’s parents’ address and then 1 hauled out a city map. I had no idea where Turquesa Road was. I finally spotted it, a street about the size of an ingrown hair, off an equally obscure lane in the foothills that stretch across the back of town.The house was staunch and plain, all upright lines, with a driveway so steep that I avoided it altogether and squeezed rny car in along the ice plant growing below. A bald cinderblock wall prevented the hillside from tumbling into the road and gave the impression of a series of barricades as it zigzagged up to the front. Once I reached the porch, the view was spectacular, a wide-angle shot of Santa leresa from end to end with the ocean beyond. A hang-glider hovered high up to my right, sailing in lazy circles toward the beach. The day was full of hard sunlight, meager clouds looking like white foam just beginning to evaporate. It was dead quiet. No traffic, no sense of neighbors nearby. I could see a rooftop or two but there was no feeling of people. The landscaping was sparse, composed of drought-tolerant plants: pyracantha, wisteria, and succulents.I rang the bell-The man who came to the door was short, tense, unshaven.“Mr. Bergen?”“That’s right.”I handed him my business card. “I’m Kinsey Millhone. Bobby Callahan hired me to look into the accident last.”“What for?”I made eye contact. His were small and blue, red-rimmed. His cheeks were prickly with a two-day growth of beard that made him look like a cactus. He was a man in his fifties, radiating the smell of beer and sweat. His hair was thinning and combed straight back from his face. He wore pants that looked like he’d retrieved them from a Salvation Army box and a T-shirt that read “Life’s a bitch. Then you die.” His arms were soft and shapeless, but his gut protruded like a basketball pumped to maximum pressure per square inch. I wanted to respond in the same rude tone he was using with me, but I curbed my tongue. This man had lost a son. Nobody said he had to be polite.“He thinks the accident was an attempt on his life,” I said.“Bullshit-I don’t mean to be rude to you, lady, but let me fill you in. Bobby Callahan is a rich kid. He’s spoiled, irresponsible, and self-indulgent. He fuckin’ drank too much and he ran off the road, killing my son, who was incidentally his best friend. Anything else you’ve heard is horseshit.”“I’m not so sure of that,” I said.“Well, I am and I’m telling you straight. Check the police reports. Its all there. Have you seen’em?”“I got copies yesterday from Bobby’s attorney,” I said.“No physical evidence, right? You got Bobby’s claim someone ran him off the road, but you got nothing to substantiate a word he says, which in my mind makes his story pure crap.”“The police seem to believe him.”“You think they can’t be bought off? You think the cops can’t be persuaded by a few bucks?”“Not in this town,” I said. This man had really put me on the defensive and I didn’t like the way I was handling myself.“Says who?”“Mr. Bergen, I know a lot of the local police. I’ve worked with them.” It sounded lame, but I was sincere.He interrupted again, saying, Nuts! He made a dismissive gesture, turning his head with disgust. “I got no time for this. Maybe my wife’11 talk to you.”“I’d rather talk to you,” I said. He seemed surprised by that, as though no one ever preferred to talk to him.“Forget it. Ricky’s dead. It’s all over with.”“Suppose it’s not? What if Bobby’s really telling the truth and it wasn’t his fault?”“What’s it to me in any event? I don’t give a good god-darnn about him.”I nearly replied, but I shut my mouth instead, trusting some other instinct. I didn’t want to get caught up in endless petty arguments that would only serve to keep this man inflamed. His agitation was profound, but I suspected that there was an ebb and flow to it. “May I have ten minutes of your time?”He thought about it for a moment and then agreed with an air of annoyance. “Christ, come on in. I’m havin’ my lunch. Reva’s gone anyway.”He walked away from the door, leaving it up to me to close it after us and follow him through the house, which was drably carpeted and smelled as if it had been closed up. Window shades were drawn against the afternoon sun and the light in the house had an amber cast. I received a brief impression of overscaled furniture: two matching recliners covered in green plastic, and an eight-foot sectional sofa with an afghan on one end, occupied by a big black dog.The kitchen was done in thirty-year-old linoleum with cabinets painted an intense shade of pink. The appliances made the room look like an illustration from an old issue of Ladies’ Home Journal. There was a small built-in breakfast nook with newspapers piled up on one bench, and a narrow wooden table with a permanent centerpiece composed of sugar bowl, paper-napkin dispenser, salt and pepper shakers shaped like ducks, a mustard jar, ketchup bottle, and a bottle of A-l Sauce. I could see his sandwich preparations laid out too: an assortment of processed cheese slices and a lunchmeat laced with olives and ominous chunks of animal snout.He sat down and motioned me into the bench across from him. I shoved aside some of the newspapers and took a seat.He was already slathering Miracle Whip on that brand 01 soft white bread that can double as a foam sponge. I kept my eyes discreetly averted as if he were engaged in pornographic practices. He laid a thin slice of onion on the bread and then peeled the cellophane wrap from the cheese, finishing with layers of lettuce, dill pickles, mustard, and meat. He looked up at me belatedly. “You hungry?”“Starved,” I said. I’d eaten a mere thirty minutes before and it wasn’t my fault if I was hungry again. The way I looked at it, the sandwich was filled with preservatives, which might be just what I needed to keep my body from going bad. He cut the first masterpiece diagonally, passing half to me, and then he made a second sandwich more lavish than the first and cut that one, too. I watched him patiently, like a well-trained dog, until he gave the signal to eat.For three minutes, we sat in silence, wolfing down lunch. He popped open a beer for me and a second one for himself. I despise Miracle Whip but, in this instance, it seemed like a gourmet sauce. The bread was so soft our fingertips left dents near the crust.Between bites, I dabbed the corners of my mouth with a paper napkin. “I don’t know your first name,” I said.“Phil. What kind of name is Kinsey?”“My mother’s maiden name.”And that was the extent of the social niceties until we’d both pushed our plates back with a sigh of relief.
