---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "C Is for Corpse - index_split_005.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - C Is for Corpse"
tags: ["bobby", "like", "kitty", "one", "room", "derek", "hand", "door", "said", "know", "kleinert", "u", "could", "going", "face", "white", "seemed", "shook", "something", "two", "guess", "left", "mother", "went", "come"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/CIsforCorpse-indexsplit005html

---


Unknown
Chapter 4I waited in the hallway, shoes in hand, while Bobby covered her with a blanket and tiptoed out of the room, closing the door gently.“What’s the story?” I said. “She’s O.K. She was just up late last night.”“What are you talking about? She’s half dead!” He shifted uneasily. “You really think so?”“Bobby, would you look at her? She’s a skeleton. She’s doing drugs, alcohol, cigarettes. You know she’s smoking dope on top of that. How’s she going to survive?”“I don’t know. I guess I didn’t think she was that bad of£” he said. He was not only young, he was naive, or maybe she’d been going under so gradually that he couldn’t see the shape she was in.“How long has she been anoretic?”“Since Rick died, I guess. Maybe some before that. He was-her boyfriend and she took it pretty hard.”“Is that what Kleinert’s seeing her for? The anorexia?”“I guess. I never really asked. She was a patient of his before I started seeing him.”A voice cut in. “Is there some problem?” Derek Wenner was approaching from the gallery, highball in hand. He was a man who’d been good-looking once. Of medium height, fair-haired, his gray eyes magnified by glasses with steel-blue frames. He was in his late forties now, by a charitable estimate, a solid thirty pounds overweight. He had the puffy, florid complexion of a man who drinks too much and his hairline had receded in a wide U that left a runner of thinning hair down the center, clipped short and brushed to one side. The excess pounds had given him a double chin and a wide neck that made the collar of his dress shirt seem tight. His pleated gabardine pants looked expensive and so did his loafers, which were tan and white, with vents cut into the leather. He’d been wearing a sport coat earlier, but he’d taken it off, along with his tie. He unbuttoned his collar with relief.“What’s going on? Where’s Kitty? Your mother wants to know why she hasn’t joined us.”Bobby seemed embarrassed. “I don’t know. She was talking to us and she fell asleep.”“Fell asleep” seemed a bit understated to me. Kitty’s face had been the color of a plastic ring I sent away for once as a kid. The ring was white, but if you held it to the light for a while and then cupped your hand over it, it glowed faintly green. This, to me, did not connote good health.“Hell, I better talk to her,” he said. I had to guess he’d had his hands full with her. He opened the door and went into Kitty’s room.Bobby gave me a look that was part dismay and part anxiety. I glanced in through the open door. Derek put his drink on the table and sat down on Kitty’s bed.“Kitty?”He put a hand on her shoulder and shook her gently. There was no response. “Hey, come on, honey. Wake up.”He shot me a worried look.He gave Kitty a rough shake. “Hey, come on. Wake up.”“You want me to get one of the doctors from downstairs?” I said. He shook her again. I didn’t wait for a response.I slipped my shoes on and left my handbag by the door, heading for the stairs.When I reached the living room, Glen Callahan glance’d over at me, apparently sensing that something was wrong.She moved forward. “Where’s Bobby?”“Upstairs with Kitty. I think it might be smart to have somebody take a look at her. She passed out and your husband’s having trouble rousing her.”“I’ll get Leo.”I watched while she approached Dr. Kleinert, murmuring to him. He glanced over at me and then he excused himself from his conversation. The three of us went upstairs.Bobby had joined Derek at Kitty’s bedside, his face creased with concern. Derek was trying to pull Kitty into a sitting position, but she slumped to one side. Dr. Kleinert moved forward swiftly and pushed both men out of the way. He did a quick check of her vital signs, pulling a penlight out of the inside breast pocket of his suit. Her pupils had contracted down to pinpoints, and from where I stood, the green eyes looked milky and lifeless, apparently responding little to the light he flashed first in one, then the other. Her breathing was slow and shallow, her muscles flaccid. Dr. Kleinert reached for the telephone, which was sitting on the floor near the bed, and dialed 911.Glen remained in the doorway. “What is it?”Kleinert ignored her, apparently talking to the emergency dispatcher.“This is Dr. Leo Kleinert. I’m going to need an ambulance out on West Glen Road in Montebello. I’ve got a patient suffering from barbiturate poisoning.” He gave the address and a brief set of instructions about how to reach the place. He hung up and looked at Bobby. “You have any idea what she took?”Bobby shook his head.Derek responded, addressing the remark to Glen. “She was fine half an hour ago. I talked to her myself.”“Oh Derek. For God’s sake,” she said with annoyance.Kleinert reached over and opened the bed-table drawer. He sorted through some junk and then hesitated, pulling out a stash of pills that would have felled an elephant. They were in a Ziploc bag, maybe two hundred capsules: Nembutals, Seconals, blue-and-orange Tuinals, Placidyls, ‘Quaaludes, like colorful supplies for some exotic cottage industry.Kleinert’s expression was despairing. He looked up at Derek, holding the bag by one corner. Exhibit A in a trial that had been going on for some time by my guess.“What are those things?” Derek said. “How’d she get them?”Kleinert shook her head. “Lets get people out of here and then we’ll worry about that.”Glen Callahan had already turned and left the room and I could hear her heels clipping purposefully toward thestairs. Bobby took my arm and the two of us moved out into the hallway.Derek was apparently still having trouble believing this was happening. “Is she going to be O.K.?”Dr. Kleinert murmured a reply, but I couldn’t hear what it was.Bobby steered me into a room across the hall and closed the door. “Let’s stay out of the way. We’ll go downstairs in a bit.” He rubbed at the fingers of his bad hand as if it were a talisman. The drag in his voice was back.The room was large, with deep-set windows looking out onto the rear of the property. The wall-to-wall carpeting was white, a dense cut-pile so recently vacuumed that I could see Bobby’s footprints in places. His double bed seemed diminutive in a room that was probably thirty feet square, with a large dressing room opening off to the left and what was apparently a bathroom beyond that. A television set rested on an antique pine blanket-chest at the foot of the bed. On the wall to my right was a long built-in desk with a white Formica surface. An IBM Selectric II and the keyboard, monitor, and printer for a home computer were lined up along its length. The bookshelves were white Formica too, filled almost exclusively with medical texts. There was a sitting area in the far corner; two overstuffed chairs and an ottoman covered in a plaid fabric of rust, white, and slate blue. The coffee table, reading lamp, books and magazines stacked nearby suggested that this was where Bobby spent his leisure time.He went to an intercom on the wall and pressed a button.“Callie, we’re starving up here. Could you send us a tray? There are two of us and we’ll need some white wine too.”I could hear a hollow clattering in the background: dishes being loaded into the dishwasher. “Yes, Mr. Bobby. I’ll have Alicia bring something up.”“Thank you.”He limped over to one of the chairs and sat down. “I eat when I’m anxious. I’ve always done that. Come sit down. Shit, I hate this house. I used to love it. When I was a kid, it was great. Places to run. Places to hide. A yard that went on forever. Now it feels like a cocoon. Insulated. But it doesn’t keep bad stuff out. It feels cold. Are you cold?”“I’m fine,” I said.I sat down in the other chair. He pushed the ottoman over and I put my feet up. I wondered what it must be like to live in a house like this where all of your needs were tended to, where someone else was responsible for grocery shopping and food preparation, cleaning, trash removal, landscape maintenance. What did it leave you free to do? “What’s it like coming from money like this? I can’t even imagine it.”He hesitated, lifting his head.In the distance, we could hear the ambulance approach, the siren reaching a crescendo and then winding down abruptly with a whine of regret. He glanced at me, dabbing self-consciously at his chin. “You think we’re spoiled?” The two halves of his face seemed to give contradictory messages: one animated, one dead.“How do I know? You live a lot better than most,” I said.“Hey, we do our share. My mother does a lot of fund raising for local charities and she’s on the board for the art museum and the historical society. I don’t know about Derek. He plays golf and hangs out at the club. Well, that’s not fair. He has some investments he looks after, which is how they met. He was the executor for the trust my grandfather left me. Once he and Mom got married, he left the bank. Anyway, they support a lot of causes so it’s not like they’re just self-indulgent, grinding the poor underfoot. My mother launched the Santa Teresa Girls’ Club just about single-handedly. The Rape Crisis Center too.”“What about Kitty? What does she do with herself besides get loaded?”He looked at me carefully. “Don’t make judgments. You don’t know what any of us has been through.”“You’re right. I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to sound quite so righteous. Is she in private school?”He shook his head. “Not anymore. They moved her over to Santa Teresa High School this year. Anything to try to get her straightened out.”He stared at the door uneasily. The house was so solidly constructed there was no way to tell if the paramedics had come upstairs yet.I crossed the room and opened the door a crack. They were just coming out of Kitty’s room with the portable gurney, its wheels swiveling like a grocery cart’s as they angled her into the hall. She was covered with a blanket, so frail that she scarcely formed a mound. One thin arm was extended outside the covers. They’d started an I. V., a plastic bag of some clear solution held aloft by one of the paramedics. Oxygen was being administered through a nose cone. Dr. Kleinert moved toward the stairs ahead of them and Derek brought up the rear, hands shoved awkwardly in his pockets, his face pale. He seemed out of place and ineffectual, pausing when he caught sight of me.“I’m going to follow in my car,” he said, though no one had asked. “Tell Bobby we’ll be at St. Terry’s.”I felt sorry for him. The scene was like something out of a TV series, the medical personnel very deadpan and businesslike. This was his daughter being taken away and she might actually die, but no one seemed to be addressing the possibility. There was no sign of Bobby’s mother, no sign of the people who’d come for drinks. Everything felt ill-planned somehow, like an elaborate entertainment that was falling flat. “You want us to come, too?” I asked.Derek shook his head. “Let my wife know where I am,” he said. “I’ll call as soon as I know what’s going on.”“Good luck,” I said, and he flashed me a weak smile as if good luck was not something he’d had much experience with.I watched the procession disappear down the stairs. I closed the door to Bobby’s room. I started to say something, but Bobby cut me off“I heard,” he said.“Why isn’t your mother involved in this? Are she andr: Kitty on the outs or what?”“Jesus, it’s all too complicated to explain. Mom washed her hands of Kitty after the last incident, which isn’t as heartless as it sounds. Early on, she did what she could, but I guess it was just one crisis after another. That’s part of the reason she and Derek are having such a tough time.”“What’s the other part?”His look was bleak. Clearly, he felt he was equally to blame.There was a tap at the door and a Chicano woman with her hair in a braid appeared with a tray. Her face was expressionless and she made no eye contact. If she knew what was happening, she gave no indication of it. She fussed around for a bit with cloth napkins and cutlery. I almost expected her to present a room-service check to be signed off with a tip added in.“Thanks, Alicia,” Bobby said.She murmured something and departed. I felt uncomfortable that it was all so impersonal. I wanted to ask her if her feet hurt like mine, or if she had a family we could talk about. I wanted her to voice curiosity or dismay about the people she worked for, carted away on stretchers at odd hours of the day. Instead, Bobby poured the wine and we ate.The meal was like something out of a magazine. Plump quartered chicken served cold with a mustard sauce, tiny flaky tarts filled with spinach and a smoky cheddar cheese, clusters of grapes and sprigs of parsley tucked here and there. Two small china bowls with lids held an icy tomato soup with fresh dill clipped across the surface and a little dollop of creme fraiche. We finished with a plate of tiny decorated cookies. Did these people eat like this every day? Bobby never batted an eye. I don’t know what I expected him to do. He couldn’t squeal with excitement every time a supper tray showed up, but I was impressed and I guess I wanted him to marvel, as I did, so I wouldn’t feel like such a rube.By the time we went downstairs, it was nearly eight and the guests were gone. The house seemed deserted, except for the two maids who were tidying up the living room in silence as we passed. Bobby led us to a heavy oak-paneled door across the wide hall. He knocked and there was a murmured response. We went into a small den, where Glen Callahan was seated with a book, a wineglass on the end table at her right hand. She’d changed into chocolate-brown wool slacks and a matching cashmere pullover. A fire burned in a copper grate. The walls were painted tomato red, with matching red drapes drawn against the chill dusk. In Santa Teresa, most nights are cold regardless of the month. This room felt cozy, an intimate retreat from the rest or the house with its high ceilings and chalk-white stucco walls.Bobby sat down in the chair across from his mother. “Has Derek called yet?”She closed her book and set it aside. “A few minutes ago. She’s pulled out of it. She had her stomach pumped and they’ll be admitting her as soon as she’s out of emergency. Derek will stay until the papers have been signed.”I glanced at Bobby. He lowered his face into his hands and sighed once with relief, a sound like a low note on a bagpipe. He shook his head, staring down at the floor.Glen studied him. “You’re exhausted. Why don’t you go on to bed? I’ll want to talk to Kinsey alone anyway.”“All right. I might as well,” he said. The slur in his voice had become pronounced and I could see now that the fine muscles near his eyes were being tugged, as though stimulated electrically. Fatigue apparently exacerbated his disability. He got up and crossed to her chair. Glen took his face in her hands and stared at him intently.“I’ll let you know if there’s any change in Kitty’s condition,” she murmured. “I don’t want you to worry. Sleep well.”He nodded, laying the good side of his face near hers. He moved toward the door. “I’ll call you in the morning,” he said to me, then let himself out. I could hear his dragging gait for a moment in the hallway and then it faded from hearing.
