---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "C Is for Corpse - index_split_024.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - C Is for Corpse"
tags: ["said", "could", "know", "one", "got", "back", "right", "like", "want", "well", "going", "look", "think", "run", "let", "check", "see", "way", "god", "guy", "face", "maybe", "thought", "lunch", "go"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/CIsforCorpse-indexsplit024html

---


Unknown
Chapter 23I went into the office. There was a pile of mail on the floor under the door slot. I gathered that up and tossed it on my desk, opening the French doors to let in some fresh air. The message light on my answering machine was blinking. I sat down and pressed the playback button.The message was from my friend at the telephone company with a report on the disconnect for S. Blackman, whose full name was Sebastian S., male, age sixty-six, with a forwarding address in Tempe, Arizona. Well, that didn’t sound very promising. If all else failed, I could double back and check that out to see if there was any tie to Bobby. Somehow I doubted it. I made a note in his file. There was a certain security in having it all committed to paper. At least that way, if anything happened to me, someone could come along afterward and pick up the thread-a grim notion, but not unrealistic given Bobby’s fate.I spent the next hour and a half going through my mail, catching up on my bookkeeping. A couple of checks had come in and I entered those in accounts receivable, making out a deposit slip. One statement had been shipped back to me unopened, marked “Addressee Unknown. Return to Sender” with a big purple finger pointing right at me. God, a deadbeat. I hated getting stung for services rendered. I’d done some good work for that guy, too. I’d known he was a slow pay, but I didn’t think he’d actually stiff me for my fee. I set it aside. I’d have to track him down when I had some time.It was almost noon by then and I glanced at the phone. I knew there was a call I should make and I picked up the receiver, punching in the number before I lost my nerve.“Santa Teresa Police Department. Deputy Collins.”“I’d like to speak to Sergeant Robb in Missing Persons.”“Just a moment. I’ll connect you.”My heart was thudding in a way that made my armpits damp.I’d run into Jonah while I was investigating the disappearance of a woman named Elaine Boldt. He was a nice guy with a bland face, maybe twenty pounds overweight, amusing, direct, a bit of a rebel, pirating copies of some homicide reports for me against all the rules. He’d been married for years to his junior-high-school sweetheart, who’d abandoned him a year ago, departing with his two daughters, and leaving him with a freezer full of crappy dinners that she’d done up herself. He hadn’t been flashy but I don’t look for that anyway and I’d liked him a lot. We’d never been lovers, but he’d exhibited a bit of healthy male interest and I’d taken a dim view of it when he went back to his wife. Face it, I was miffed, and I’d kept my distance from him ever since.“Robb here.”“Jesus,” I said, “I haven’t even talked to you yet and I’m already pissed.”I could hear him hesitate. “Kinsey, is that you?”I laughed. “Yes, it’s me and I just figured out how frosted I am.”He knew exactly what I was talking about. “God. I know, babe. What a load of pig swill that was. I’ve thought about you so often.”I was saying “uh-hun, uh-hun” in what I hoped was my most skeptical tone. “How’s Camilla?”He sighed and I could almost see him run a hand through his hair. “About the same. She treats me like dirt. I don’t know why I let her back in my life.”“Must be nice to have the girls home though, isn’t it?”“Well, yeah, that’s true,” he said. “And we’re seeing a counselor. Not them. Me and her.”“Maybe that will help.”“Maybe it won’t.” He caught himself and changed his tone. “Ah. Well. I shouldn’t complain. I guess I did it to myself. I’m just sorry it ended up affecting you.”“Don’t worry about it. I’m a big girl. Besides, I’ve got a way for you to redeem yourself. I thought maybe I could buy you lunch today and pick your brain.”“Sure. I’d love it, only lunch is on me. It’ll help assuage my guilt. How you like that ‘assuage’ stuff? That’s the word of the day on my vocabulary calendar. Yesterday was ‘ineluctable.’ I never did figure out how to sneak that one in. Where do you want to go? You name the place.”“Oh, let’s keep it simple. I don’t want to spend a lot of time on social niceties.”“How about the courthouse? I’ll pick up some sandwiches and we can eat on the lawn.”“God, right out in public. Won’t the department talk?”“I hope so. Maybe Camilla will get wind of it and leave me again.”“See you at twelve-thirty.”“Is there something you want me to research in the meantime?”“Oh right. Good point.” I gave him a quick synopsis of the Costigan shooting, leaving Nola Fraker out of it. I’d decide later how much of the story I could trust him with. For now, I fed him the public version and asked if he could take a peek at the files.“I have a vague recollection of that one. Let me see what I can dig up.”“And one more thing if you would,” I said. “Could you run a check through NCIC on a woman named Lila Sams?” I gave him her two a.k.a.’s, Delia Sims and Delilah Sampson, the birthdate I’d taken off the driver’s license, and the additional information I had in my notes.“Right. Got it. I’ll do what I can. See you shortly,” he said and hung up.It had occurred to me that if Lila was running some kind of scam on Henry, she might well have a prior record. There was no way I’d have access to the National Crime Information Center except through an authorized law-enforcement agency. Jonah could have the name run through the computer and get feedback in minutes and at least then I’d know if my instincts were accurate.I tidied up my office, grabbed the bank deposit, and locked up, going next door for a few minutes to chat with Vera Lipton, one of the claims adjusters for California Fidelity Insurance. I stopped off at the bank on the way over to the courthouse, depositing most of the money to savings, with enough to my checking account to cover current expenses.The day, which had started out on preheat, was cranked up to broil by now. The sidewalks shimmered and the palms looked bleached out by the sun. Where occasional potholes in the street had been filled, the asphalt was as soft and grainy as cookie dough.The Santa Teresa Courthouse looks like a Moorish castle: hand-carved wooden doors, towers, and wrought-iron balconies. Inside, there’s so much mosaic tile on the walls, it looks like someone’s covered them with patchwork quilts. One courtroom sports a cycloramic mural that depicts the settling of Santa Teresa by the early Spanish missionaries. It’s sort of the Walt Disney version of what really went on as the artist has omitted the introduction of syphilis and the corruption of the Indians. I prefer it myself, if the truth be known. It would be hard to concentrate on justice if you had to stare up at some poor bunch of Indians in the last stages of paresis.I cut through the great archway toward the sunken gardens in the rear. There were about two dozen people scattered across the lawn, some eating lunch, some napping or taking in the sun. Idly, I catalogued the merits of a good-looking man coming toward me in a pale blue short-sleeved shirt. I was doing one of those visual surveys that starts at the bottom and moves up. Uh-hun, nice hips, dressing left... uh-hun, flat belly, great arms, I thought. He’d almost reached me when I checked out the face and realized it was Jonah.I hadn’t seen him since June. Apparently the diet and his weight-lifting regimen had worked like a charm. His face; which in the past I’d labeled “harmless,” was now nicely honed. His dark hair was longer and he’d picked up a tan so that his blue eyes now blazed in a face the color of maple sugar.“Oh, God,” I said, stopping dead in my tracks. “You look great.”He flashed me a smile, loving it. “You think so? Thanks. I must have lost twenty pounds since I saw you last.”“How’d you do it? Hard work?”“Yeah, I did a little work.”He stood and stared at me and I stared back. He was exuding pheromones like a musky aftershave and I could feel my body chemistry start to shift. Mentally, I shook myself. I didn’t need this. The only thing worse than a man just out of a marriage is a man who’s still in one.“I heard you got shot,” he said.“A mere. 22, which hardly counts. I got beat up too, and that’s what hurt. I don’t know how guys put up with that shit,” I said. I rubbed at the bridge of my nose ruefully. “Broke my schnoz.”He reached out impulsively and ran a finger down my nose. “Looks O.K. to me.”“Thanks,” I said. “It still blows pretty good.”We endured one of those awkward pauses that had always punctuated our relationship.I shifted my bag from one shoulder to the other, just for something to do. “What’d you bring?” I said, indicating the paper sack he held.He glanced down. “Oh, yeah. I forgot. Uh, subs and Pepsis and Famous Amos cookies.”“We could even eat,” I said.He didn’t move. He shook his head. “Kinsey, I don’t remember going through this before,” he said. “Why don’t we fuckin’ skip lunch and go over there behind that bush?”I laughed, because I’d just had this quick flash of something hot and nasty that I don’t care to repeat. I tucked my hand through his arm. “You’re cute.”“I don’t want to hear about cute.”We went down the wide stone steps and headed toward the far side of the courthouse lawn, where shaggy evergreens shade the grass. We sat down, distracted by the business of eating lunch. Pepsis were opened and lettuce fell out of sandwiches and we exchanged paper napkins and murmured about how good it all was. By the time we finished eating, we’d recovered some professional composure and conducted most, of our remaining conversation like adults instead of sex-starved kids.He shoved his empty Pepsi can in the sack. “I’ll tell you the scuttlebutt on that Costigan shooting. The guy I talked to used to work Homicide and he says he always thought it was the wife. It was one of those situations where the whole story stank, you know? She claimed some guy broke in, husband gets a gun, big struggle, boom! The gun goes off and hubby’s dead. Intruder runs away and she calls the cops, distraught victim of a random burglary attempt. Well, it didn’t look right, but she stuck to her guns. Hired some hotshot lawyer right off the bat and wouldn’t say a word until he got there. You know how it goes. ‘Sorry my client can’t answer this.’ ‘Sorry I won’t let her respond to that.’ Nobody believed a word she said, but she never broke down and in the end there wasn’t any proof! No evidence, no informant, no weapon, no witness. End of tale. I hope you’re not working for her because if you are, you’re screwed.”I shook my head. “I’m looking into Bobby Callahan’s death,” I said. “I think he was murdered and I think it connects back to Dwight Costigan.” I sketched the whole story out for him, avoiding his gaze. We were stretched out in the grass by then and I kept having these images of sexual misbehavior that I didn’t think would serve. I plowed right ahead, talking more than I should have just to create a diversion.“God, you come up with something on the Costigan killing and Lieutenant Dolans gonna’ crochet you a watch,” he said.“What about Lila Sams?”He held a finger up. “I was saving the best for last,” he said. “I ran a field check on her and came up with a hit. This lady has a string of wants and warrants as long as your arm. Priors going back to 1968.”“What for?”“Fraud, obtaining property by false pretenses, larceny by trick and device. She’s been passing bad paper, too. She’s got six outstanding warrants on her even as we speak. Well, wait. Take a look for yourself. I brought the print-out.”He held out the computer print-out and I took it. Why didn’t I feel more elated at the notion of nailing her? Because it would break Henry’s heart and I didn’t want to take responsibility for that. I ran an eye down the sheet. “Can I keep this?”“Sure, but don’t jump up and down like that. Calm yourself,” he said. “I take it you know where she is.”I looked over at him with a weak smile. “Probably sitting in my backyard drinking iced tea,” I said. “My landlord is head over heels in love with her and I suspect she’s on the verge of taking him for everything he’s worth.”“Talk to Whiteside in Fraud and he’ll have her picked up.”“I think I better talk to Rosie first.”“That old bag who runs the dive down the street from you? What’s she got to do with it?”“Oh, neither one of us can stand Lila. Rosie wanted me to do the background check for the aggravation if nothing else. We needed to know where she was coming from.”“So now you know. What’s the problem?”“I don’t know. It just feels crummy somehow, but I’ll figure it out. I don’t want to rush into anything I’ll regret.”There was a momentary silence and then Jonah gave my shirt a tug. “You been up to the shooting range lately?”“Not since we were there together,” I said.“You want to go up there sometime?”“Jonah, we can’t do that.”“Why not?”“Because it might feel like a date and confuse us both.”“Come on. I thought we were friends.”“We are. We just can’t hang out together.”“Why not?”“Because you’re too good-looking and I’m too smart,” I said tartly.“We’re back to Camilla again, right?”“Right. I’m not going to interfere with that. You’ve been with her a long time.”“I tell you something. I’m still kicking myself. I could have gone to the other junior high school, you know? Seventh grade. How did I know I was making a decision that would haunt me in middle-age?”I laughed. “Life is full of that stuff. You had to choose between metal or woodshop, right? You could have turned out to be an auto mechanic. Instead you’re a cop. You know what my choices were? Child psychology or home ec. I didn’t give a shit about either one.”“I wish I hadn’t seen you again.”I could feel my smile fade. “Well, I’m sorry for that. It was my fault.” I could tell we’d been looking at each other too long, so I got up, brushing grass off my jeans. “I have to go.”He got up too and we said some good-bye things. We parted company shortly thereafter. I walked backward for a few steps, watching him head back to the station. Then I continued on toward my office, turning my attention back to the matter of Henry Pitts. I realized then that there wasn’t any point in talking to Rosie about it. Of course I’d have to tell the cops where Lila was. She’d been a con for nearly twenty years and she wasn’t going to reform and make Henry a happy man in the twilight of their days. She was going to cheat him silly, thus breaking his heart anyway. What difference did it make how she got caught or who turned her in? Better to do it now before she took every cent he had.I’d been walking rapidly, head down, but when I got to the corner of Floresta and Anaconda, I did an abrupt left and headed for the police station.
