---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "C Is for Corpse - index_split_025.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - C Is for Corpse"
tags: ["lila", "said", "one", "moza", "could", "like", "get", "back", "two", "door", "warrant", "time", "see", "henry", "looked", "thought", "might", "took", "going", "suitcase", "face", "right", "officer", "think", "got"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/CIsforCorpse-indexsplit025html

---


Unknown
Chapter 24I was at the police station for an hour and forty-five minutes. Fortunately, the Missing Persons Department and Fraud were nowhere near each other so I didn’t have to worry about running into Jonah again. First, Whiteside was at lunch and then he had a quick meeting to attend. Then when I explained the situation to him, he had to place a call to a county in northern New Mexico where three of the warrants had been issued. While he was waiting for a response to that inquiry, he contacted the county sheriff in some little town up near San Francisco, trying to get confirmation on a no-bail warrant that originated in Marin. The charge on the fifth warrant in Boise, Idaho, turned out to be a misdemeanor and the fraud detective said he couldn’t afford to come get her in any event. The sixth warrant, in Twin Falls, had been recalled for reasons unspecified. So far, Lila Sams was home free.At 3:20, Marin County finally returned Whiteside’s call, confirming the no-bail warrant and indicating that they’d have someone pick her up once they knew she was actually in custody. Their cooperation was largely due to the fact that one of their deputies was vacationing in Santa Teresa anyway and had agreed to accompany her back to Marin. Whiteside said as soon as a telexed “copy of the warrant came through, he’d send the beat officer over to make the arrest. He didn’t really have to have the warrant in hand, but I think he d sensed by now that she was slippery. I gave him Moza’s address, my address, and a thorough description of Lila Sams.It was 3:40 by the time I got home. Henry was sitting on a chaise in the backyard, surrounded by books. He looked up from his legal pad as I came around the corner.“Oh, it’s you,” he said. “I thought it might be Lila. She said she’d stop in and say good-bye before she took off.”That caught me by surprise. “She’s leaving?”“Well, she’s not really ‘leaving.’ She’s going to Las Cruces for a few days, but she hopes to be back by the end of the week. I guess a little problem came up on some property she owns and she has to get things squared away. It’s a darn nuisance, but what can you do?”“She’s not gone already, though, is she?”He checked his watch. “I can’t imagine she would be. Her plane takes off about five. She said she had to go to the title company and then she’d toss a few things in a suitcase. Did you want to talk to her?”I shook my head, unable to say yet what needed to be said. I could see that he was mapping out a new crossword puzzle, jotting down preliminary notes. At the top of the page, he’d written two titles, “Elementary, Dear Watson!” and “Home Sweet Holmes.”He smiled shyly when he saw me take note. “This one’s for the Sherlockeans in the crowd,” he said. He set the legal pad aside, as though self-conscious at having someone watch him work. “Well, now, how are things with you?”He seemed so innocent, nothing more on his mind than his passion for words. How could she deceive a man like that?“Something’s come up I think you ought to know about,” I said. I unfolded the computer print-out and handed it to him.He looked down at it. “What’s this?”Lila’s name apparently caught his eye then, because his gaze settled on the page. His face lost animation as he assimilated the facts. When he finished reading, he gestured aimlessly. He was silent for a moment and then he glanced up at me. “Well. Makes me look like a fool, doesn’t it?”“Come on, Henry. Don’t talk like that. I don’t think so at all. You took a risk and she brought you some happiness. Hey, so later it turns out she’s a crook. That’s not your fault.”He stared at the paper like a kid just learning to sound out words. “What made you check into it?”I thought there might be a tactful explanation, but nothing occurred to me. “I didn’t like her much, to tell you the truth. I guess I felt protective, especially when you talked about doing business with her. I just didn’t think she was on the level and it turns out she’s not. You haven’t given her any money, have you?”He folded the print-out. “I closed out one of my accounts this morning.”“How much?”“Twenty thousand in cash,” he, said. “Lila said she’d deposit it to an escrow account at the title company. The bank manager urged me to reconsider, but I thought he was simply being conservative. I see now, he was not.” His manner had become very formal and it nearly broke my heart.“I’m going down to Moza’s to see if I can intercept her before she takes off. You want to come?”He shook his head, his eyes bright. I turned on my heel and moved off at a quick clip.I trotted the half-block to Moza’s. A taxicab was cruising at half speed, the driver scanning house numbers. The two of us reached Moza’s at just about the same time. He pulled over to the curb. I crossed to the passenger side, peering into the open window. He had a face like a beachball made of flesh.“You the one wanted a cab?”“Uh, sure. Lila Sams?”He checked his trip sheet. “Right. You got any bags you need help with?”“Actually, I don’t need the cab. A neighbor said she’d run me out to the airport. I called back, but I guess the dispatcher didn’t head you off in time. Sorry.”He gave me a look, then heaved an exasperated sigh, making a big display of crossing the address off his sheet. He shifted gears with annoyance, pulling away from the curb with a shake of his head. God, he could go on stage with an act like that.I crossed Moza’s yard at an angle and took the porch steps two at a time. She was holding the screen door open, looking out anxiously at the departing taxi. “What did you say to him? That was Lila’s cab. She has to get to the airport.”“Really? He told me he had the wrong address. He was looking for Zollinger, one street over, I think.”1 better try another company. She ordered a cab thirty minutes ago. She’s going to miss her plane.”“Maybe I can help,” I said. “Is she in here?”“You’re not going to cause any trouble, Kinsey. I won’t have that.”“I’m not causing trouble,” I said. I moved through the living room and into the hall. The door to Lila’s room was open.The place had been stripped of personal possessions. One of the drawers where she’d concealed a phony I. D. was sitting on top of the chest of drawers, its back panel bare. She’d left the masking tape in a wad like a hunk of chewing gum. One suitcase was packed and sat near the door. Another was open on the bed, half filled, and beside it was a white plastic purse.Lila had her back to me, bending over to remove a stack of folded clothes from one of the dressing-table drawers. The polyester pantsuit she wore was not very flattering. From the rear, her ass looked like two hanging foam-rubber hams. She caught sight of me as she turned. “Oh! You scared me. I thought it was Moza. What can I do for you?”“I heard you were leaving. I thought maybe I could help.”Uncertainty flickered in her eyes. Her abrupt departure was probably at the urging of her cohorts in Las Cruces, alerted by my phone call of the night before. She might have suspected it was me, but she couldn’t be sure. For my part, I was just hoping to stall until the cops showed up. I had no intention of confronting her. For all I knew, she might whip out a little two-shot Derringer or fly at me with some kind of old-lady karate-type move that would take me right out.She checked her watch. It was now almost 4:00. It took twenty minutes to get to the airport and she’d have to be there by 4:30 or risk losing her seat. That gave her ten minutes. “Oh dear. Well, I don’t know why my taxi isn’t here. I might need a ride to the airport, if you could do that,” she said.“No problem,” I said. “My car’s right down the street. Henry said you’d be stopping by his place anyway to say good-bye.”“Of course I am, if I have time. He’s such a sweetie.” She finished laying in the armload of clothes and I could see her look around the room to see if she’d missed anything.“Did you leave anything in the bathroom? Shampoo? Hand laundry?”“Oh, I believe I did. I’ll be right back.” She moved past me, heading for the bathroom.I waited until she rounded the corner and then reached over and opened her purse. Inside was a fat manila envelope with Henry’s name penciled on the front. I took off the rubber band and checked the contents. Cash. I closed her purse again and tucked the envelope into the waistband of my jeans at the small of my back. I figured Henry was never going to press charges and I hated to see his savings confiscated and itemized as police property. No telling when he’d get it back. I was just adjusting my T-shirt over the bulge when she returned, toting shampoo, shower cap, hand lotion. She tucked them in around the sides of her folded clothes and closed up the suitcase, snapping the locks shut.“Here, I’ll get it,” I said. I hauled that suitcase off the bed and picked up the other one, moving out into the hall like a pack mule. Moza was standing there, wringing out an imaginary dish towel in her anxiety.“I can take one of those,” she said.“I got it.”I headed for the door, with Moza and Lila bringing up the rear. I certainly hoped the cops would show. Lila and Moza were saying those last-minute things to one another, Lila faking it out the whole time. She was taking off. She was gone. She had no intention of coming back.As we reached the front, Moza moved ahead so she could hold the screen door open for me. A black-and-white patrol car had just pulled up in front. I was afraid if Lila spotted them too soon, she’d bolt for the rear.“Did you get that pair of shoes under the bed?” I asked over my shoulder. I paused in the doorway, blocking her view.“I don’t know. I just looked and I didn’t see any.”“You probably got them, then,” I said.“No, no. I better check.” She hurried toward the bedroom while I set the two suitcases on the porch.Moza, meanwhile, was staring at the street with puzzlement. Two uniformed officers were coming up the walk, one male, one female, both bareheaded, in short-sleeved shirts. In Santa Teresa, there’s been a move afoot to divest the police of their authoritarian images, but these two managed to seem ominous anyway. Moza probably thought she’d violated some civil code-grass too long, TV too loud.I left her to have a little conversation with them while I herded Lila up this way, so she wouldn’t spot the cops and try slipping out the back. “Lila, your ride’s here,” I called.“Well thank heaven for that,” she said, as she came through the living room. “I didn’t find anything under the bed, but I’d left my ticket right up on the chest, so it’s lucky I went back.”As she reached the front door, I eased behind her. She glanced up, catching sight of the officers.The guy, according to his name tag, was G. Pettigrew. He was black, maybe in his thirties, with big arms and a barrel chest. His partner, M. Gutierrez, looked almost as hefty as he.Pettigrew’s eyes settled on Lila. “Are you Lila Sams?”“Yes.” She loaded that one syllable with puzzlement, blinking at him. Her body seemed to change so that she looked older and more squat.“Could you step out onto the porch, please?”“Of course, but I can’t think what this is about.” Lila made a move toward her purse, but Gutierrez intercepted, checking the contents quickly for weapons.Pettigrew told Lila she was under arrest, reciting her rights to her from a card he held. I could tell he’d done it all a hundred times and didn’t really need the cue, but he read it anyway so there wouldn’t be any question later.“Could you turn around and face the wall, please?”Lila did as she was told and Gutierrez did a pat-down, then snapped on a pair of handcuffs. Lila was starting to wail pitifully. “But what have I done? I haven’t done anything. This is all a terrible mistake.” Her desperation seemed to set Moza off.“What’s going on, officer?” Moza said. “This woman is my tenant. She hasn’t done anything wrong.”“Ma’am, we’d appreciate it if you’d step back, please. Mrs. Sams is entitled to contact an attorney when we get downtown.” Pettigrew touched at Lila’s elbow, but she pulled away, her voice rising to a shrill pitch.“Help! Oh no! Let go of me. Help!”The two officers took control of her, one on either side, moving her off the porch at a businesslike pace, but Lila’s shrieks were beginning to bring curious neighbors out onto their porches. She went limp, sagging heavily between them, craning her face toward Moza with a piteous cry. They hustled her into the squad car, picking her feet up to deposit her in the rear. Lila somehow conveyed the impression that this was a Gestapo arrest, that she was being hauled off by the Nazis and might never be heard from again. Shaking his head, Officer Pettigrew gathered up her belongings, which were now strewn along the walk. He tucked her suitcases in the trunk.The man next door apparently felt called upon to intercede and I saw him in conversation with Pettigrew while Gutierrez called in to the station and Lila thrashed about, flinging herself at the mesh that separated her from Gutierrez in the front seat. Finally Pettigrew got in the car on the driver’s side, slamming the door shut, and they pulled away.Moza was dead white and she turned a stricken face to me. “This was your doing! What in heaven’s name were you thinking of? The poor woman.”But I’d caught sight of Henry half a block away. Even at that distance, his face seemed blank with disbelief, his body tense. “I’ll talk to you later, Moza,” I said and headed toward him.
