---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "C Is for Corpse - index_split_023.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - C Is for Corpse"
tags: ["nola", "said", "like", "back", "could", "know", "one", "bobby", "dwight", "well", "got", "thought", "going", "little", "tell", "think", "book", "time", "thing", "right", "oh", "kid", "let", "told", "knew"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/CIsforCorpse-indexsplit023html

---


Unknown
Chapter 22The interior of the Fraker house was cool and spare; gleaming dark wood floors, white walls, bare windows, fresh flowers. The furniture was upholstered in white linen and the den into which Nola ushered me was lined with books. She excused herself and I heard her high heels tap-tap-tapping away down the hall.It’s never a good idea to leave me in a room by myself. I’m an incurable snoop and I search automatically. Having been raised from the age of five by an unmarried aunt, I spent a lot of time as a child in the homes of her friends, most of whom had no children of their own. I was told to keep quiet and amuse myself, which I managed in the first five minutes with the latest in an endless series of coloring books we brought with us when visiting. The problem was that I was terrible at keeping in the lines and the pictures always seemed dumb to me-little children frolicking with dogs and visiting farms. I didn’t like to color chickens or hogs, so I learned to search. In this manner, I discovered people’s hidden lives-the prescriptions in the medicine cabinets, tubes of jelly in bed-table drawers, cash reserves in the back of coat closets, startling sex manuals and marital artifacts between the mattress and box springs. Of course, I could never quiz my aunt afterward about the extraordinary-looking objects I came across because I wasn’t supposed to know about them in the first place. Fascinated, I would wander into the kitchen, where the adults in those days seemed to congregate, drinking highballs and talking about achingly dull things like politics and sports, and I would stare at women named Bernice and Mildred whose husbands were named Stanley and Edgar, and I would wonder who did what with the long doodad with the battery stuck in one end. It was not a flashlight. That much I knew. Early on, I discerned the sometimes remarkable distinction between public appearances and private tastes. These were the people my aunt forbade me to swear in front of no matter how we talked at home. Some of the phrases she used, I thought might have application here, but I could never confirm this. The whole process of education for me was learning the proper words to attach to things I already knew.The Frakers’ den exhibited a shocking lack of hiding places. No drawers, no cabinets, no end tables with cupboards underneath. The two chairs were chrome with leather straps. The coffee table was glass with narrow chrome legs, sporting a decanter of brandy and two snifters on a tray. There wasn’t even a carpet to peek under. Jesus, what kind of people were they? I was reduced to touring the bookshelves, trying to divine their hobbies and avocations from the volumes on hand.People do tend to hang on to hardbacked books, and I could see that Nola had gone through interior design, gourmet cooking, gardening, needlework, and personal beauty hints. What caught my attention, however, were the two shelves lined with books on architecture. What was that about? Surely, neither she nor Dr. Fraker was commissioned to design buildings in their spare time. I took out an oversized volume called Architectural Graphic Standards and checked the flyleaf. The engraved bookplate showed a lithograph of a seated cat staring at a fish in a bowl. Under the Ex Libris, the name Dwight Costigan was scratched in a masculine hand. A reminder bell tinkled at the back of my brain. I thought he was the architect who designed Glen’s house. A borrowed book? I checked three more in rapid succession. All of them were “from the library of Dwight Costigan. That was odd. Why here?I heard Nola tapping back in my direction and I slipped the book into place, then eased over to the window and acted as though I’d occupied my time by looking out. She came into the den with a smile that went on and off again like a loose connection. “Sorry you had to wait. Have a seat.”I hadn’t really given a lot of thought to how I was going to handle this. Every time I rehearse these little playlets in advance, I’m brilliant and the other characters say exactly what I want to hear. In reality, nobody gets it right, including me, so why worry about it before the fact?I sat down in one of the chrome-and-leather chairs, hoping I wouldn’t get lodged in the straps. She sat down on the edge of a white linen love seat, resting one hand gracefully on the surface of the glass coffee table in an attitude that suggested serenity, except that she was leaving little pads of perspiration at her fingertips. I took in the sight of her at a quick glance. Slim, long-legged, with those perfect apple-sized breasts. Her hair was a paid-for shade of red, framing her face in a tumble of soft waves. Blue eyes, flawless skin. She had that clear ageless look that comes with first-rate cosmetic surgery, and the black jumpsuit she wore emphasized her lush body without being vulgar or crass. Her manner was solemn and sincere, and struck me as false.“What can I help you with?” she asked.I had a split second in which to make a judgment. Could Bobby Callahan truly have gotten involved with a woman as phony as this? Oh hell, who was I trying to kid? Of course!I gave her a fifteen-watt smile, resting my chin on my fist. “Well, I have a little problem, Nola. May I call you Nola?”“Certainly. Glen mentioned you were investigating Bobby’s death.”“That’s true. Actually Bobby just hired me a week ago and I feel like I ought to give him his moneys worth.”“Oh. I thought maybe there was something wrong and that was why you were looking into it.”“There might be. I don’t know yet.”“But shouldn’t the police be doing that?”“I’m sure they are. I’m conducting a... you know, an auxiliary investigation, just in case they’re on the wrong track.”“Well, I hope somebody figures it out. Poor kid. We all feel so bad for Glen. Are you having any luck?”“As a matter of fact, I am. Somebody told me half the story and all I have to do is figure out the rest.”“It sounds like you’re doing pretty well, then.” She hesitated delicately. “What kind of story?”I suspect she didn’t really want to ask, but the nature of the conversation dictated that she must. She was pretending to cooperate so, of course, she had to feign interest in a subject she’d probably prefer to ignore.I let a moment pass while I stared down at the tabletop. I thought it lent a note of credibility to the lie I was about to tell. I looked back at her, making significant eye contact. “Bobby told me he was in love with you.”“With me?”“That’s what he said.”The eyes blinked. The smile went off and on. “Well, I’m astonished. I mean, it’s very flattering and I always thought he was a sweet kid, but really!”“I didn’t find it that astonishing.”Her laugh conveyed a wonderful combination of innocence and disbelief “Oh, for heaven’s sake. I’m married. And I’m twelve years older than he is.”Shit, she was quick-shaving years off her age without pausing to count on her fingers or anything. I’m not that fast at subtraction so it’s probably fortunate that I don’t lie about how old I am.I smiled slightly. She was pissing me off and I found myself using a mild, deadly tone. “Age doesn’t matter. Bobby’s dead now. He’s older than God. He’s as old as anybody’s ever going to get.”She stared at me, cuing in to the fact that I was mad. “You don’t have to get nasty about it. I can’t help it if Bobby Callahan decided he was in love with me. So the kid had a crush on me. So what?”“So the kid had an affair with you, Nola. That’s what. You got your tit in a wringer and the kid was helping you out. The kid was murdered because of you, ass eyes. Now, shall we quit bullshitting each other and get down to business on this or shall I call Lieutenant Dolan down at Homicide and let him have a chat with you?”“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” she snapped. She got up, but I was already on my feet and I clamped a hand around that dainty wrist so fast she gasped. She gave a little jerk and I released her, but I could feel myself expand with anger like a hot-air balloon.“I’m telling you, Nola. You’ve got a choice. You tell me what was going on or I’m going to start leaning on you. In fact, I may do that anyway. I’ll whip on down to the courthouse and I’ll start going through public records and newspaper accounts and police files until I get a little background information on you and then I’m going to figure out what you’re hiding and then I’m going to find a way to stick it to you so bad you’ll wish you’d blabbed the whole story out right here.”That’s when I got the jolt. In the back of my brain, I heard a sound like a parachute catching air. Thwunk... it opened up. It Was one of those extraordinary moments when automatic recall clicks in and a piece of information pops up like a flash card. It must have been the adrenaline pumping through my head because I suddenly retrieved some data from my memory bank and it appeared on my mental screen just as clear as could be... not the whole of it, but enough. “Wait a minute. I know who you are. You were married to Dwight Costigan. I knew I’d seen you somewhere. Your picture was in all the papers.”Her face drained of color. “That has nothing to do with this,” she said.I laughed, primarily because sudden recollection does that to me. A mental leap has a little chemical component to it that gives a quick rush.“Oh come on,” I said. “It does connect. I don’t know how yet, but it’s all the same tale, isn’t it?”She sank back down on the love seat, one hand reaching for the glass tabletop to steady herself. She breathed deeply, trying to relax. “You would do well to let this pass,” she said, not looking at me.“Are you nuts?” I said. “Are you out of your tiny mind? Bobby Callahan hired me because he thought somebody was trying to kill him and he was right. He’s dead now and he’s got no way to rectify the situation, but go and if you think I’ll back off this sucker, you don’t know me.”She was shaking her head. All the beauty was gone and what remained seemed drab. She looked, then, like we all look in fluorescent lighting-tired, sallow, shopworn. Her voice was low. “I’ll tell you what I can. And then I beg you to drop the investigation. I mean that. For your own good. I did have an affair with Bobby.” She paused, searching for the path she wanted to take. “He was a wonderful person. He really was. I was crazy about him. He was so uncomplicated and he had no history. He was just young and healthy, vigorous. God. He was twenty-three. Even the sight of his skin. He was like a-” Her eyes came up to mine and she broke off with embarrassment, a smile forming and faltering, this time from some emotion I couldn’t read... pain or tenderness, perhaps.I eased into the chair carefully, hoping I wouldn’t spoil the mood.“When you’re that age,” she said, “you still think things can be made right. You still think you can have anything you want. You think life’s simple, that you only have to do one or two little things and it will all turn around. I told him it wasn’t like that for me, but he had a streak of gallantry in him. Sweet fool.”She was silent for a long time.‘“Sweet fool,’ what?” I said quietly.“Well, he died for it, of course. I can’t tell you the guilt I’ve felt....” She trailed off and she looked away.“Tell me the front end. How does Dwight fit in? He was shot, right?”“Dwight was much older than I. Forty-five when we were married. I was twenty-two. It was a good marriage... up to a point at any rate. He adored me. I admired him. He did incredible things for this town.”“He designed Glen’s house, didn’t he?”“Not really. His father was the original architect when the house was built back in the twenties. Dwight did the restoration,” she said. “I think I need a drink. Do you want one?”“Sure, that’s fine,” I said.She reached for the brandy decanter, removing the heavy glass stopper. She laid the neck of the decanter against the edge of one of the snifters, but her hands were shaking so badly I thought she’d crack the glass. I reached over and took the bottle from her, pouring her a stiff shot. I poured myself one too, though at ten in the morning, it was the last thing I wanted. She gave hers a perfunctory swirl and we both drank. I swallowed and my mouth came open automatically as if I’d just risen to the surface of a swimming pool. This was clearly fine stuff, but I didn’t think I’d need my teeth cleaned for a year. I watched her calm herself, taking a deep breath or two.1 was trying desperately to recall the accounts I’d read of the incident in which Costigan was killed. It must have been five or six years ago. As nearly as I could remember, someone had broken into their Montebello house one night and had shot Dwight to death after a struggle in the bedroom. I’d been off in Houston for a client so I hadn’t followed the events very closely, but as far as I knew, it was still sitting on the books as an unsolved homicide.“What happened?” I asked.“Don’t ask and don’t interfere. I pleaded with Bobby to let it go, but he wouldn’t listen and it cost him his life. The past is the past. It’s over and done with and I’m the only one paying for it now. Forget it. I don’t care, and if you’re smart, you won’t either.”“You know I can’t do that. Tell me what went on.”“What for? It won t change anything.”“Nola, I’m going to find out whether you tell me or not. If you lay it out for me maybe it won’t have to go any further than this. Maybe I’ll understand and agree to drop the whole thing. I’m not unreasonable, but you’ve gotta play fair.”I could see the indecision written in her face. She said, “Oh God,” and put her head down for a moment. She looked at me with anxiety. “We’re talking about a lunatic. Someone so crazy. You’d have to swear... you’d have to promise to back off.”“I can’t make a promise like that and you know it. Tell me the story and then we’ll figure out what has to be done.”“I’ve never told anyone except Bobby and look what happened to him.”“What about Sufi? She knows, doesn’t she?”She blinked at me, momentarily startled at the mention of Sufi’s name. She looked away from me. “No, not at all. I’m sure she doesn’t know what’s going on. Why would she?” The answer seemed too hesitant to be convincing, but I let it pass for the time being. Could Sufi be blackmailing her?“Well, somebody else knows,” I said. “From what I gather, you’re being blackmailed and that’s what Bobby was trying to stop. What’s the deal? What does this person have on you? What kind of leverage?”I let the silence stretch, watching as she struggled with her need to unload.Finally, she started talking, her voice so low I was forced to lean forward so I could hear her. “We’d been married nearly fifteen years. Dwight was on medication for high blood pressure and it made him impotent. We’d never had a highly charged sex life anyway. I got restless and found..... someone else.”“A lover.”She nodded, eyes closed as if the recollection hurt her. “Dwight walked in on us one night in bed. He was crazed. He got a gun from the study and came back and there was a struggle.”I caught the sound of footsteps coming down the hall. I glanced toward the door and she did too, her voice becoming urgent.“Don’t breathe a word of this. Please.”“Trust me, I won’t. What’s the rest?”She hesitated. “I shot Dwight. It was an accident, but somebody has the gun with my fingerprints on it.”“And that’s what Bobby was searching for?”She nodded almost imperceptibly.“But who has it? Your ex-lover?”Nola raised a finger to her lips. There was a tap at the door and Dr. Fraker stuck his head in, apparently surprised to see me sitting there. “Oh, hi, Kinsey. Is that your car in the drive? I was just about to take off, and I couldn’t figure out who was here.”“I stopped by to talk to Nola about Glen,” I said. “I don’t think she’s doing too well and I was wondering if we shouldn’t work out some arrangement to take turns spending time with her now that Derek’s gone.”He shook his head regretfully. “Dr. Kleinert told me she’d kicked him out. Damn shame. Not that I have any use for him myself, but she’s got her share of trouble right now. I hate to see her saddled with something else.”“Me, too,” I said. “Do you need me to move my car?”“No, that’s fine,” he said, looking over at Nola. “I’ve got some work to do at the hospital, but I shouldn’t be back too late. Do we have dinner plans?”She smiled pleasantly, though she had to clear her throat before she could speak. “I thought we’d eat here if that’s all right with you.”“Sure, it’s fine. Well. I’ll let you two hatch your little schemes. Nice to see you, Kinsey.”“Actually we’re finished,” Nola said, getting up.“Oh, well good,” he said, “I’ll walk you out.”I knew she was just using his appearance as a way to terminate the conversation, but I couldn’t think of any delaying tactics, especially with the two of them standing there looking at me.We exchanged brief good-byes and then Dr. Fraker held the door for me and I left the den. As I glanced back, I could see that Nola’s expression was tinged with anxiety, and I suspected she was wishing she’d kept her secret to herself. She had a lot at stake: freedom, money, status, respectability. She was vulnerable to anyone who knew what I now knew. I wondered how desperate she was to hang on to what she had and what kind of payment had been extracted from her as a result.
