---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "C Is for Corpse - index_split_013.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - C Is for Corpse"
tags: ["glen", "bobby", "like", "death", "fraker", "seemed", "face", "kleinert", "kitty", "would", "could", "funeral", "derek", "casket", "saw", "something", "said", "look", "day", "people", "left", "long", "set", "going", "eye"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/CIsforCorpse-indexsplit013html

---


Unknown
Chapter 12Everything happens for a reason, but that doesn’t mean there’s a point. The next few days were a nightmare, the more so as mine was only a peripheral role in the pageantry of Bobby’s death. Because I’d appeared in the first moments of her grief, Glen Callahan seemed to fix on me, as though I might provide a solace for her pain.Dr. Kleinert agreed to release Kitty until after the burial, and an attempt was made to reach Bobbys natural father overseas, but he never responded and nobody seemed to care. Meanwhile, hundreds of people streamed through the funeral home: Bobbys friends, old high-school classmates, family friends and business associates, all the town dignitaries, members of the various boards Glen served on. The Who’s Who of Santa Teresa. After that first night, Glen was totally composed-calm, gracious, tending to every detail of Bobby’s funeral. It would be done properly. It would be done in the best of taste. I would be on hand throughout.I had thought Derek and Kitty would resent my constant presence, but both seemed relieved. Glen’s single-mindedness must have been a frightening prospect to them.Glen ordered Bobbys casket closed, but I saw him for a moment at the funeral home after his body had been “prepared.” In some ways, I needed that glimpse to convince myself that he was really dead. God, the stillness of the flesh when life has gone. Glen stood there beside me, her gaze fixed on Bobby’s face, her own expression as blank and inanimate as his. Something had left her with his death. She was unflinching, but her grip on my arm tightened as the lid to the casket was closed.“Good-bye, baby,” she whispered. “I love you.”I turned away quickly.Derek approached from behind and I saw him move as though to touch her. She didn’t turn her head, but she radiated a rage so limitless that he kept his distance, intimidated by the force of it. Kitty stood against the back wall, stony, her face blotchy from tears wept in solitude. Somehow I suspected that she and her father wouldn’t remain in Glen’s life for long. Bobby’s death had accelerated the household decay. Glen seemed impatient to be alone, intolerant of the requirements of ordinary intercourse. They were takers. She had nothing left to give. I scarcely knew the woman, but it seemed clear to me that she was suddenly operating by another set of premises. Derek watched her uneasily, sensing, perhaps, that he wasn’t part of this new scheme, whatever it was.Bobby was buried on Saturday. The church services were mercifully short. Glen had selected the music and a few passages from various non-Biblical sources. I took my cue from her, surviving the eulogy by neatly disconnecting myself from what was said. I wasn’t going to deal with Bobby’s death today. I wasn’t going to lose control in a public setting like this. Even so, there were moments when I could feel my face heat up and my eyes blur with tears. It was more than this loss. It was all death, every loss-my parents, my aunt.The funeral cortege must have been ten blocks long, cruising across the city at a measured pace. At every intersection, traffic had been forced to stop as we rolled by, and I could see the comments in the faces we passed. “Ooo, a funeral. Wonder whose.”“Gorgeous day for it.”“God, look at all the cars.”“Come on, come on. Get out of the way.”We wound into the cemetery, as green and carefully landscaped as a housing tract. Headstones stretched out in all directions, a varied display, like a stonecutter’s yard filled with samples of his work. There were intermittent evergreens, clusters of eucalyptus and sycamore. The cemetery parcels were sectioned off by low walls of shrubbery and on a plot map probably had names like Serenity and Heavenly Meadows.We parked and everyone trooped across the newly trimmed grass. It felt like an elementary-school outing: everyone on their best behavior, nobody quite sure what to do next. There were occasional murmured conversations, but for the most part, we were silent, Mortuary personnel, in dark suits, escorted us to our seats like ushers at a wedding.The day was hot, the afternoon sunlight intense. There was a breeze that rustled the treetops and lifted the canvas tent flaps flirtatiously. We sat dutifully while the minister conducted the final rites. I felt better out here and I realized it was the absence of organ music that made the graveside ceremony less potent. Even the most banal of church hymns can rip your heart out at times like this. I preferred the sound of wind.Bobby’s casket was a massive affair of glossy walnut and brass, like an oversized blanket chest too large for the space allotted. Apparently, the casket would fit down into the vault especially purchased to house it underground. There was some kind of complex mechanism set up above the grave site that would eventually be used to lower the casket into the hole, but I gathered that was done at some later time.Funeral styles had evolved since my parents were buried and I wondered, idly, what had dictated the change. Technology, no doubt. Maybe death was tidier these days and easier to regulate. Graves were dug by machinery, which carved out a neat pit surmounted now by this low-slung contraption on which the casket rested. No more of this horseshit with the loved ones flinging themselves into the grave. With this new apparatus in place, you’d have to get down on your belly and leopard-crawl into the hole, which robbed the gesture of its theatrical effect.Off to one side among the mourners, I saw Phil and Reva Bergen. He seemed upset, but she was impassive. Her gaze drifted from the minister’s face to mine and she stared at me flatly. Behind them, I thought I saw Kelly Borden, but I couldn’t be sure. I shifted in my chair, hoping to make eye contact, but the face was gone. The crowd began to disperse and I was startled to realize it was over. The minister, in his black robes, gave Glen a solemn look, but she ignored him and moved toward the limousine. Derek, in a show ot good manners, lingered long enough to exchange a few remarks.Kitty was already in the backseat when we reached the limo. I would have bet money she was high on something. Her cheeks were flushed and her eyes were feverishly bright, her hands restless in her lap, plucking at her black cotton skirt. The outfit she’d elected to wear had an outlandish gypsy air to it, the black cotton top composed of tiers of ruffles, embroidered in garish shades of turquoise and red. Glen had blinked lazily when she’d first set eyes on Kitty and an almost imperceptible smile had hovered on her lips before she turned her attention to something else. She’d apparently decided not to make an issue of it. Kitty’s manner had been defiant, but with no resistance on Glen’s part the juice had drained out of the drama before she’d even launched into the first art.I was standing by the limo when I saw Derek approach. He climbed into the backseat and pulled down one of the collapsible camp stools, reaching to pull the door shut.“Leave it open,” Glen murmured.The limo driver was still nowhere in sight. There was a delay while people took their places in the vehicles parked along the road. Others were milling around on the grass to no apparent purpose.Derek tried to catch Glen’s eye. “Well, I thought that went very well.’Glen turned pointedly and peered out of the far window. When your only child has been killed, who really gives a shit?Kitty took out a cigarette and lit it. Her hands looked like birds’ claws, the skin almost scaly. The elasticized neckline of her blouse revealed a chest so thin that her sternum and costal cartilages were outlined like one of those joke T-shirts.Derek made a face as the smell of smoke filled the backseat. “Jesus, Kitty, put that out. For Christ’s sake!”“Oh, leave her alone,” Glen said, dully, Kitty seemed surprised by the unexpected support, but she stubbed out the cigarette anyway.The driver appeared and closed the door on Derek’s side, then moved around the rear of the limousine and slid in under the steering wheel. I moved on toward my car as he pulled away.The mood was much lighter once we got to the house. People seemed to shrug death aside, comforted by good wine and lavish hors d’oeuvres. I don’t know why death still generates these little tetes-a-tetes. Everything else has been modernized, but some vestige of the wake remains. There must have been two hundred people crowded into the living room and hall, but it all seemed O.K. It was filler, just something to smooth the awkward transition from the funeral to the bone-crushing sleep that was bound to come afterward.I recognized most of the people who’d been at Derek’s birthday gathering that past Monday night: Dr. Fraker and his wife, Nola; Dr. Kleinert and a rather plain woman whom I assumed was Mrs. K.; the other doctor who’d been present, Metcalf, in conversation with Marcy, who had worked with Bobby briefly in the Pathology Department. I snagged a glass of wine and inched my way across the room to Fraker’s side. He and Kleinert had their heads bent together and they paused as I approached.“Hi,” I said, suddenly self-conscious. Maybe this wasn’t such a hot idea. I took a sip of wine, noting the look that passed between them. I guess they decided I could be privy to their discussion, because Fraker picked up where he’d left off.“Anyway, I won’t be doing the microscopic until Monday, but from the gross, it looks like the immediate cause of death was a ruptured aortic valve.”Kleinert said, “From impact with the steering wheel.”Fraker nodded, taking a sip of wine. The explanation of his findings continued almost as though he were dictating it all over again. “The sternum and multiple ribs were fractured and the ascending aorta was incompletely torn just above the superior border of the valve cusps. Additionally, there was a left hemothorax of eight hundred cc and a massive aortic adventitial hemorrhage.”Kleinert’s expression indicated that he was following. The whole thing sounded sickening to me and I didn’t even know what it meant.“What about the blood alcohol?” Kleinert asked.Fraker shrugged. “That was negative. He wasn’t drunk.We should have the rest of the results this afternoon, but I don’t think we’re going to find anything. I could be surprised, of course.”“Well, if you’re right about the CSF blockage, a seizure was probably inevitable. Bernie warned him to watch for the symptoms,” Kleinert said. His face was long and etched with a look of permanent sorrow. If I had emotional problems and needed a shrink, I didn’t think it would help me to look at a face like that week after week. I’d want somebody with some energy, pizzazz, somebody with a little hope.“Bobby had a seizure?” I asked. It was clear by now that they were discussing his autopsy results. Fraker must have realized I didn’t have any idea what they were actually saying, because he offered a translation.“We think Bobby may have been suffering from a complication of the original head injury. Sometimes, a blockage develops in the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid. Intra-cranial pressure builds up and part of the brain starts to atrophy, resulting in posttraumatic epilepsy.”“And that’s why he ran off the road?”“In my opinion, yes,” Fraker said. “I can’t state this categorically, but he’d probably been experiencing headaches, anxiety, irritability perhaps.”Kleinert cut in again. “I saw him at seven, seven fifteen, something like that. He was terribly depressed.”“Maybe he suspected what was going on,” Fraker was saying.“Too bad he didn’t speak up then, if that’s the case.”The murmuring between them continued while I tried to take in the implications.“Is there any way a seizure like that could have been drug-induced?” I asked.“Sure, it’s possible. Toxicology reports aren’t comprehensive and the analyses’ results depend on what’s asked for. There are several hundred drugs which could affect a person with a predisposition to seizures. Realistically, it isn’t possible to screen for all of them,” Fraker said.Kleinert shifted restlessly. “Actually, after what he went through, it’s a wonder he survived as long as he did. We tried to spare Glen, but I think we’ve all been worried that something like this might occur.”There didn’t seem to be anything left to say on the subject.Kleinert finally turned to Fraker. “Have you eaten yet? Ann and I are going out for supper if you and Nola want to join us.”Fraker declined the invitation, but he did need his wineglass filled and I could see him eyeing the crowd for some sign of his wife. Both doctors excused themselves.I stood there, unsettled, reviewing the facts. Theoretically, Bobby Callahan had died of natural causes, but in fact, he’d died as a consequence of injuries received in the accident nine months ago, which he, at least, believed was a murder attempt. As nearly as I could remember, California law provides that “a killing is murder or manslaughter if the party dies within three years and a day after the stroke is received or the cause of death is administered.” So the truth was, he was murdered and it didn’t make any difference at all if he died that night or last week. At the moment, of course, I didn’t have any proof. I did still have the bulk of the money Bobby had paid me and a clear set of instructions from him, so I was still in business if I wanted to be.Mentally, I got up and dusted myself off. It was time to put grief aside and get back to work. I set my wineglass down and had a brief word with Glen to let her know where I’d be and then I went upstairs and systematically searched Bobbys room. I wanted that little red book.
