---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "C Is for Corpse - index_split_012.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - C Is for Corpse"
tags: ["like", "know", "bobby", "could", "said", "car", "face", "back", "want", "head", "sound", "one", "reva", "way", "door", "hand", "chair", "two", "looked", "rick", "going", "u", "looking", "time", "glen"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/CIsforCorpse-indexsplit012html

---


Unknown
Chapter 11After lunch, we sat out on the deck in painted metal porch chairs pockmarked with rust. The deck was actually a shelf of poured concrete, forming the roof of the garage, which had been carved into the hillside. Wooden planters filled with annuals formed a low protective barrier around the perimeter. A mild breeze was picking up, offsetting the heavy blanket of sunshine that settled on my arms. Phil’s belligerence was gone. He’d been pacified perhaps by the many chemicals in his lunch, but more likely by the two beers and the prospect of the cigar he was clipping with a pocket guillotine. He plucked a big wooden kitchen match from a can next to his chair and bent down, using the surface of the deck to scratch it into life. He puffed on the cigar until it drew fully, then shook the match out and dropped it in a flat tin ashtray. For a moment, we both sat and stared out at the ocean.The view was like a mural painted on a blue backdrop. The islands in the channel looked grim and deserted, twenty-six miles out. On the mainland, the small beaches were faintly visible, the surf like a tiny ruffle of white lace. The palm trees looked no bigger than fledgling asparagus. I could pick out a few landmarks: the courthouse, the high school, a big Catholic church, a theater, the one office building downtown over three stories high. From this vantage point, there was no evidence of the Victorian influence or any of the later architectural styles that blended now with the Spanish.This house, he told me, had been finished in the summer of 1950. He and his wife, Reva, had just bought the place when the Korean War broke out. He’d been drafted and had gone off two days after they moved in, leaving Reva with stacks of cardboard boxes to unpack, returning fourteen months later with a service-related disability. He didn’t specify what it was and I didn’t ask, but he had apparently only worked sporadically since his medical discharge. They’d had five children and Rick had been the youngest. The others were scattered now through the Southwest.“What was he like?” I asked. I wasn’t sure he’d answer. The silence stretched on and I wondered if perhaps it might have been the wrong question. I hated to spoil whatever sense of camaraderie we’d established.He shook his head finally. “I don’t know how to answer that,” he said. “He was one of those kids you think you’re never going to have a minute’s trouble with. Always sunny, did things without being told, good grades in school. Then when he was sixteen or so-his last year in high school-he seemed to lose his footing. He graduated all right, but he didn’t seem to know what to do with himself. He was drifting. Had the grades for college and God knows I’d have found the money someplace, but it didn’t interest him. Nothing did. Oh, he worked, but it never amounted to a hill of beans,”“Was he doing drugs?”“I don’t think so. At least there was never any sign of it that I could see. The kid drank a lot. Reva thought it was that, but I don’t know. He did like to party. He was out ‘til all hours, slept the weekends away, hung out with kids like Bobby Callahan, way above us socially. Then he started dating Bobby’s stepsister, Kitty. Christ, that girl was trouble the day she was born. By then, I was sick of putting up with him. If he didn’t want to be part of the family, fine. Go somewhere else, though, earn your own keep. Don’t think you can use this place to get meals and laundry done,” He paused, looking over at me. “Was I wrong? I’m asking you.”“I don’t know,” I said. “How can you answer a question like that anyway? Kids get off-course and then they straighten out. Half the time, it doesn’t have anything to do with parents. Who knows what it is?”He was silent, staring out at the horizon, his lips encircling the cigar like a hose coupling. He sucked in some nicotine, then blew out a cloud of smoke. “Sometimes I wonder how bright he was. Maybe he should have seen a therapist, but how did I know? That’s what Reva says now. What’s a psychiatrist going to do with a kid who has no ambition?”I didn’t have a response to any of this so I made sympathetic sounds and let it go at that.Brief silence. He said, “I hear Bobby’s all messed up.”His tone was hesitant, a guarded inquiry about a hated rival. He must have wished Bobby dead a hundred times, cursing his good fortune at having survived.“I’m not sure he wouldn’t trade places with Rick if he could,” I said, feeling my way. I didn’t want to set off a fresh surge of agitation, but I didn’t want him harboring the notion that Bobby was somehow “luckier” than Rick. Bobby was working his ass off to make life all right, but it was a struggle.Below us, an old pale blue Ford rattled into view, spewing exhaust. The driver swung wide around my car and paused, apparently activating an automatic garage door. The car nosed out of sight beneath us and, moments later, I heard the muffled sound of the car door slamming.“That’s my wife,” Phil said, as the garage-door mechanism ground under our feet.Reva Bergen trudged up the steep walk, burdened with grocery sacks. I noted with curiosity that Phil made no move to assist her. She caught sight of us as she reached the porch. She hesitated, her face a perfect blank. Even at that distance, her gaze had an unfocused quality that seemed more pronounced when she finally came out of the back door, moments later, to join us. She was a dishwater blonde with that washed-out look women sometimes acquire in their fifties. Her eyes were small, nearly lashless. Pale eyebrows, pale skin. She was frail and bony, her hands looking as clumsy as gardening gloves on her narrow wrists. The two of them seemed so entirely unsuited to each other that I quickly discarded the unbidden image of their marital bed.Phil explained who I was and the fact that I was investigating the accident in which Rick had been killed.Her smile was mean. “Bobby’s conscience bothering him?”Phil interceded before I could frame a response. “Come on, Reva. What harm can it do? You said yourself the police.”She turned abruptly and went back inside. Phil shoved his hands down in his pockets with embarrassment. “Nuts. She’s been like that ever since it happened. Things set her off. I haven’t been a joy to live with myself, but this thing has torn her heart out.”“I should be on my way,” I said. “But I would like for you to do one thing if you would. I’ve been trying to figure out what could possibly have been going on back then and I’m not having much luck so far. Did Rick give you any indication that Bobby was in trouble or upset? Or that he might have had some kind of problem himself?”He shook his head. “Rick’s whole life was a problem to me, but it didn’t have anything to do with the accident. I’ll ask Reva, though, and see if she knows anything.”“Thanks,” I said. I shook his hand and then fished a card out of my bag so he’d know how to get in touch with me.He walked me down to the road and I thanked him again for lunch. As I got in my car, I glanced up. Reva was standing on the porch, staring down at us.I headed back into town. I stopped by the office to check my answering machine for messages (none) and my mail, which was all junk. I made a fresh pot of coffee and hauled out my portable typewriter, detailing the notes on my investigation to that point. It was painstaking stuff given the fact that I’d turned up absolutely nothing. Still, Bobby was entitled to know how I’d spent my time and at thirty bucks an hour, he was entitled to know where the money went.At three o’clock, I locked the office and walked over to the public library, which was two blocks over and two blocks up. I went downstairs to the periodicals room and asked for the previous September’s newspapers, now consigned to microfilm. I found a machine and sat down, threading in the first reel. The print was white on black, all of the photographs looking like negatives. I had no idea what I might spot so I was forced to skim every page. Current events, national news, local political issues, fire, crime, storm systems, folks being born and dying and getting divorced. I read the lost-and-found column, the personals, society, sports. The mechanism for advancing the film was somehow out of whack, so that paragraphs jerked onto the nine-by-twelve screen with the focus slightly skewed, generating a motion sickness of sorts. Around me, people were browsing among the magazines or were seated in low chairs, reading newspapers attached to upright wooden lances. The only sounds in the room were the drone of the machine I was using, an occasional cough, and the rustle of newsprint.I managed to check the papers for the first six days of September before my resolve faltered. I’d have to do this in small doses. My neck felt stiff and my head was starting to ache. A glance at my watch showed that it was nearly five and I was bored to death. I made a note of the last date I’d scanned and then I fled into the late-afternoon sunshine. I walked back to my office building and retrieved my car from the parking lot without going upstairs.On the way home, I stopped off at the supermarket for milk, bread, and toilet paper, doing a quick tour with my cart. There was so much lyrical music playing overhead, I felt like the heroine in a romantic comedy. Once I’d found what I needed, I moved to the express lane, twelve items or less. There were five of us in line, all surreptitiously counting the contents of each other’s carts. The man in front of me had a head too small for the size of his face, like an under-inflated balloon. He had a little girl with him, maybe four years old, wearing a brand-new dress several sizes too big. Something about it spelled “poor,” but I don’t know why. It made her look like a midget; waistline at her hips, the hem down around her ankles. She held the man’s hand with perfect trust, giving me a shy smile so filled with pride that I found myself smiling back.I was tired by the time I got home and my left arm ached. There are days when I scarcely remember the injury, other days when I feel drained by a constant dull pain. I decided to skip my run. To hell with it. I took a couple of Tylenol with codeine, kicked my shoes oft; and crawled into the folds of my quilt. I was still there when the phone rang. I awoke with a start, reaching automatically for the receiver. My apartment was dark. The unexpected shrill blast of sound had sent a jolt of adrenaline through me and my heart was pounding. I glanced at the clock with uneasiness. Eleven-fifteen.I mumbled hello, rubbing a hand across my face and through my hair.“Kinsey, it’s Derek Wenner. Have you heard?”“Derek, I’m sound asleep.”“Bobby’s dead.”“What?”“I guess he’d been drinking, though we’re not even sure of that at this point. His car went off the road and smashed into a tree on West Glen. I thought you’d want to know.”“What?” I knew I was repeating myself but I couldn’t understand what he was talking about.“Bobby’s been killed in a car accident.”“But when?” I don’t know why it mattered. I was just asking questions because I couldn’t cope with the information any other way.“A little after ten. He was dead by the time they got him to St. Terry’s. I have to go down and identify him, but there doesn’t seem to be any doubt.”“Can I do anything?”He seemed to hesitate. “Well, actually, maybe you could. I tried to reach Sufi, but I guess she’s out. Dr. Metcalfs service is tracking him down, so he’ll probably be here in a bit. I wonder if you could sit with Glen in the meantime. That way, I can head on over to the hospital and see what’s going on.”“I’ll be right there,” I said and hung up.I washed my face and brushed my teeth. I was talking to myself the whole time,, but I didn’t feel anything. All my inner processes seemed to be suspended temporarily while my brain struggled with the facts. The information kept bounding back. No way. Nuh-un. How could Bobby be gone? Not true.I grabbed a jacket, my handbag, and my keys. I locked up, got in my car, started the engine, pulled out. I felt like a well-programmed robot. When I turned onto West Glen Road, I saw the emergency vehicles and I could feel a chill tickle at the base of my spine. It was just at the big bend, a blind corner near the “slums.” The ambulance was already gone, but patrol cars were still there, radios squawking in the night air. Bystanders stood on the side of the road in the dark while the tree he’d hit was washed with high-intensity floodlights, the raw gash in the trunk looking like a fatal wound in itself. His BMW was just being removed by a tow truck. The scene looked, oddly, like a location for a movie being shot. I slowed, turning to peer at the site with an eerie feeling of detachment. I didn’t want to add to the confusion and I was worried about Glen, so I drove on. A little voice murmured, “Bobby’s dead.” A second voice said, “Oh no, lets don’t do that. I don’t want that to be true, O.K.?”I pulled into the narrow drive, following it until it opened out into the empty courtyard. The entire house was blazing with lights as if a massive party were in progress, but there was no sound and not a soul in sight, no cars visible. I parked and moved toward the entrance. One of the maids, like an electronic sensing device, opened the door as I approached. She stepped back, admitting me without comment.“Where’s Mrs. Callahan?”She closed the door and started down the hall. I followed. She tapped at the door to Glen’s study and then turned the knob and stepped back again, letting me pass into the room.Glen was dressed in a pale pink robe, huddled in one of the wing-back chairs, knees drawn up. She raised her face, which was swollen and waterlogged. It looked as if all of her emotional pipes had burst, eyes spilling over, cheeks washed with tears, her nose running. Even her hair was damp. For a moment, still in disbelief, I stood there and looked at her and she looked at me and then she lowered her face again, extending her hand. I crossed and knelt by her chair. I took her hand-small and cold-and pressed it against my cheek.“Oh Glen, I’m sorry. I’m so sorry,” I whispered.She was nodding acknowledgment, making a low sound in her throat, not even a clearly articulated cry. It was a sound more primitive than that. She started to speak, but she could only manage a sort of dragged-out, stuttering phrase, sub-English, devoid of sense. What difference did it make what she said? It was done and nothing could change it. She began to cry as children cry, deep, shuddering sobs that went on and on. I clung to her hand, offering her a mooring line in that churning sea of grief.Finally, I could feel the turbulence pass like a battering rain cloud moving on. The spasms subsided. She let go of me and leaned back, taking in a deep breath. She took out a handkerchief and pressed it against her eyes, then blew her nose. She paused, apparently looking inward, much in the way one does at the end of an attack of hiccups.She sighed. “Oh God, how will I get through this?” she said, and the tears welled up again, splashing down her face. She regained control after a moment and went through the mop-up process again, shaking her head. “Jesus. Shit. I don’t think I can do this, Kinsey. You know? Its just too hard and I don’t have that kind of strength.”“You want me to call anyone?”“No, not now. It’s too late and what’s the point? In the morning, I’ll have Derek get in touch with Sufi. She’ll come.”“What about Kleinert? You want me to let him know?”She shook Her head. “Bobby couldn’t stand him. Just let it be. He’d find out soon enough. Is Derek back?” Her tone was anxious now, her face tense.“I don’t think so. You want a drink?”“No, but help yourself if you like. The liquor’s in there.”“Maybe later.” I wanted something, but I wasn’t sure what it was. Not a drink. I was afraid alcohol would eat through the thin veneer of self-control. The last thing in the world she needed was to have to turn around and comfort me. I sat down in the chair across from her and an image flashed into my mind. I remembered Bobby bending down to say good night to her just two nights ago. He had turned automatically so he could offer her the good side of his face. It had been one of his last nights sleep on this earth, but neither of them had known that, nor had I. I glanced up at her and she was looking at me as if she knew what was going on in my head. I glanced away, but not quickly enough. Something in her face spilled over me like light through a swinging door. Sorrow shot through the gap, catching me off-guard, and I burst into tears.
