---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "D Is for Deadbeat - index_split_013.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - D Is for Deadbeat"
tags: ["like", "back", "would", "one", "car", "beach", "daggett", "could", "home", "lot", "sand", "never", "made", "get", "along", "wave", "line", "boat", "man", "old", "gun", "better", "seemed", "make", "headed"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/DIsforDeadbeat-indexsplit013html

---


Unknown
Chapter 12I sat in the car and shuddered. I couldn’t think when an interview had made me feel so tense. Daggett had to have been murdered. I just didn’t see how it could come down any other way. What I couldn’t figure out was how to get my thinking straight. Usually the morality of homicide seems clear to me. Whatever the shortcomings of the victim, murder is wrong and the penalties levied against the perpetrator had better be substantial to balance out the gravity of the crime. In this case, that seemed like a simplistic point of view. It was Daggett who had caused the world to tilt on its axis. Because of him, five people had died, so that his death, whatever the instrument, was swinging the planet upright again, restoring a moral order of sorts. At the moment, I still didn’t know whether his desire to make restitution was sincere or part of some elaborate con. All I knew was that I’d been caught up in the loop and I had a part to play, though I had no idea yet what it was.I started the car and headed back to my place. The sky was clouding over again. It was after 5:00 and a premature twilight already seemed to be spilling down the mountainside. I pulled up in front of my apartment and switched off the ignition. I glanced over at my windows, which were dark. I was feeling edgy and I wasn’t ready to go home yet. On impulse, I started the car again and headed for the beach, drawn by the scent of salt in the air. Maybe a walk would ease my restlessness.I pulled into one of the municipal lots and parked, slipping out of my shoes and pantyhose, which I tossed in the back seat along with my handbag. I zipped up my windbreaker and locked the car, tucking my keys in my jacket pocket as I crossed the bike path to the beach. The ocean was silver, but the breaking waves were a muddy brown and the sand along the surf line was peppered with rocks. This was the winter beach, dark boulders having surfaced with the shifting coastal sands. Gulls hovered overhead, eyeing the thundering waves for signs of edible sea life.I walked along the wet sand with a buffeting wind at my back. A windsurfer clung to the crossbar on a bright green sail, arching himself against the force of the wind, his board streaking toward the beach. Two big fishing boats were chugging into the marina. Everywhere there was the sense of urgency and threat-the torn white of storm surf, the darkening gray of the sky. Across the harbor, the ocean drove at the shore without pity, pounding at the breakwater with a grudging monotony. A rocketing spray shot straight up on impact, fanning along the seawall. I could almost hear the splats as successive waves hit the concrete walkway on the landward side.I passed the entrance to the wharf. Ahead the beach widened, curving left toward the marina where the bare masts of sailboats tilted in the wind like metronomes. The sand was softer here, deeper too, so that walking became a labor. I turned and walked backwards for a few steps, trying to get my bearings. Somewhere along this part of the beach was the spot where Daggett’s body had been found. A brief glimpse of the site had appeared on the newscast and I was hoping now to get a fix on the place. I thought it was probably this side of the boat launch. Ahead and to my right was the kiddie park with its playground equipment and a fenced-in area with a wading pool.The newscast had shown a portion of the dredge in the background, intersected by the breakwater and a line of rocks. I trudged on until I had the three lined up in the same configuration. The dry sand was trampled and there were signs that vehicles had crossed the beach. Where waves slapped against the shore, all traces of activity had been erased. The crime scene investigators had, no doubt, done at least a cursory search. I scanned the area without any expectation of finding “evidence.” If you murder a man by tossing him, dead drunk, out of a rowboat, there aren’t any telltale clues to dispose of afterward. The boat itself had been left to drift and, from what Jonah said, must have washed ashore closer to the pier.I drank in the heady perfume of the sea, watching the restless surge of the waves, turning myself slowly until the ocean was at my back and I was staring at the line of motels across the boulevard. Daggett had apparently died sometime between midnight and 5:00 A.M. I wondered if it would be productive to canvas the neighborhood for witnesses. It was possible, of course, that Daggett had actually cut the line on the skiff himself, rowing out of the harbor alone. With a 0.35 blood alcohol level, it seemed unlikely. By the time blood alcohol concentrations reach 0.40 percent, a drunk is essentially in a state of deep anesthesia, incapable of anything so athletic as working an oar. He might have maneuvered his way out of the harbor first and then sat in the bobbing boat, drinking himself insensible, but I couldn’t picture that. I kept visualizing somebody with him... waiting, watching... finally hefting his feet and toppling him backwards. “A lesson in the back flip, Daggett. Oh shit, you blew it. Too bad, sucker. You die.”Getting him in the boat in the first place might have been a trick, as drunk as he was, but the rest of it must have been a snap.I glanced to my right. An old bum with a shopping cart was picking through a trash container. I crossed the sand, heading toward him. As I approached, I could see that his skin was nearly gray with accumulated filth, tanned by the wind, with an overlay of rosiness from recent sunburn or Mogen David wine... Mad Dog 20-20, as it’s better known among the scruffy drifters. He looked in his seventies and was bulked up by layers of clothing. He wore a watch cap, his gray hair hanging out of it like mop strings. He smelled as musky as an old buffalo. The odor radiated from his body in nearly visible wavy lines, like a cartoon rendition of a skunk.“Hello,” I said.He went about his business, ignoring me. He pulled out a pair of spike heels, inspecting them briefly before he tucked them into one of his plastic trash bags. A two-day-old newspaper didn’t interest him. Beer cans? Yes, he seemed to like those. A Kentucky Fried Chicken barrel was a reject. A skirt? He held it up with a critical eye and then shoved it into the trash bag with the shoes. Someone had discarded a plastic beach ball with a hole punched in it. The old man set that aside.“Did you hear about the guy they found in the surf yesterday?” I asked. No response. I felt like an apparition, calling to him from the netherworld. I raised my voice. “I heard somebody down here spotted him and called the cops. Do you happen to know who?”I guess he didn’t care to discuss it. He resolutely avoided eye contact. I didn’t have my handbag with me so I didn’t have a business card or even a dollar bill as a letter of reference. I had no choice but to let it drop. I moved away. By then, he had worked his way down in the bin, his head almost out of sight. So much for my interviewing techniques.By the time I got back to the parking lot, the light had faded, so I registered the fact that something was wrong long before I realized what it was. The door on the passenger side of my car was ajar. I stopped in my tracks.“Oh no,” I said.I approached with caution, as if the vehicle might be booby-trapped. It looked like someone had run a coathanger in through the wind-wing in an attempt to jimmy the lock. Failing that, the shitheel had simply smashed the window out on the passenger side and had opened the door. The glove compartment hung open, the contents spilling out across the front seat. My handbag was missing. That generated a flash of irritation, swiftly followed by dread. I jerked the seat forward and hauled out my briefcase. The strap that secured the opening had been cut and my gun was gone.“Oh nooo,” I wailed. I gave vent to a string of expletives. In high school, I had hung out with some bad-ass boys who taught me to cuss to perfection. I tried some combinations I hadn’t thought of in years. I was mad at myself for leaving the stuff in plain sight on the seat and mad at the jerk who ripped me off. Mine was one of the last cars left in the lot and had probably stood out like a beacon. I slammed the car door shut and headed off across the street, still barefoot, gesturing and muttering to myself like a mental case. I didn’t even have the spare change to call the cops.There was a hamburger stand close by and I conned the fry cook into making the call for me. Then I went back and waited until the black-and-white arrived. The beat officers, Pettigrew and Gutierrez (Gerald and Maria, respectively), I’d encountered some months before when they made an arrest in my neighborhood.She took the report now, while he made sympathetic noises. Somehow the two of them managed to console me insofar as that was possible, calling for a crime scene investigator who obligingly came out and dusted for prints. We all knew it was pointless, but it made me feel better. Pettigrew said he’d check the computer for the serial number on my gun, which was registered, thank God. Maybe it would turn up later in a pawn shop and I’d get it back.I love my little semiautomatic, which I’ve had for years... a gift from the aunt who raised me after my parents’ death. That gun was my legacy, representing the odd bond between us. She’d taught me to shoot when I was eight. She had never married, never had children of her own. With me, she’d exercised her many odd notions about the formation of female character. Firing a handgun, she felt, would teach me to appreciate both safety and accuracy. It would also help me develop good hand-eye coordination, which she thought was useful. She’d taught me to knit and crochet so that I’d learn patience and an eye for detail. She’d refused to teach me to cook as she felt it was boring and would only make me fat. Cussing was okay around the house, though we were expected to monitor our language in the company of those who might take offense. Exercise was important. Fashion was not. Reading was essential. Two out of three illnesses would cure themselves, said she, so doctors could generally be ignored except in case of accident. On the other hand, there was no excuse for having bad teeth, though she viewed dentists as the persons who came up with ludicrous schemes for the human mouth. Drilling out all of your old fillings and replacing them with gold, was one. She had dozens of these precepts and most are still with me.Rule Number One, first and foremost, above and beyond all else, was financial independence. A woman should never, never, never be financially dependent on anyone, especially a man, because the minute you were dependent, you could be abused. Financially dependent persons (the young, the old, the indigent) were inevitably treated badly and had no recourse. A woman should always have recourse. My aunt believed that every woman should develop marketable skills, and the more money she was paid for them the better. Any feminine pursuit that did not have as its ultimate goal increased self-sufficiency could be disregarded. “How to Get Your Man” didn’t even appear on the list.When I was in high school, she’d called Home EC “Home Ick” and applauded when I got a D. She thought it would make a lot more sense if the boys took Home EC and the girls took Auto Mechanics and Wood Shop. Make no mistake about it, she liked (some) men a lot, but she wasn’t interested in tending to one like a charwoman or a nurse. She was nobody’s mother, said she, not even mine, and she didn’t intend to behave like one. All of which constitutes a long-winded account of why I wanted my gun back, but there it is. I didn’t have to explain any of this to G. Pettigrew or M. Gutierrez. They both knew I’d been a cop for two years and they both understood the value of a gun.By the time everyone left the parking lot, it was fully dark and starting to rain again. Oh perfect.I drove home and started making out a list of items I’d have to replace, including my driver’s license, gasoline charge card, checkbook, and God knows what else. While I was at it, I looked up three “800” numbers, phoning in the loss of my credit cards from the Xerox copy I keep in my file drawer at home. I’d only been carrying about twenty bucks in cash, but I resented the loss. It was all too irritating to contemplate for long. I showered, pulled on jeans, boots, and a sweater, and headed up to Rosie’s for a bite to eat.Rosie’s is the tavern in my neighborhood, run by herself, a Hungarian woman in her sixties, short and top-heavy, with dyed red hair that recently had looked like a cross between terra cotta floor tile and canned pumpkin pie filling. Rosie is an autocrat-outspoken, overbearing, suspicious of strangers. She cooks like a dream when it suits her, but she usually wants to dictate what you should eat at any given meal. She’s protective, sometimes generous, often irritating. Like your best friend’s cranky grandmother, she’s someone you endure for the sake of peace. I hang out at her establishment because it’s unpretentious and it’s only half a block away from my place. Rosie apparently feels that my patronage entitles her to boss me around... which is generally true.That night when I walked in, she took one look at my face and poured me a glass of white wine from her personal supply. I moved to my favorite booth at the rear. The backs are high, cut from construction grade plywood and stained dark, with side pieces shaped like the curve of a wingback chair. Within moments, Rosie materialized at the table and set the glass of wine in front of me.“Somebody just busted out the window of my car and stole everything I hold dear, including my gun,” I said.“I’ve got some soska leaves for you,” she announced. “And after that, you gonna have a salad made with celery root, some chicken paprikas, some of Henry’s good rolls, cabbage strudel, and deep-fried cherries if you’re good and clean up your plate. It’s on the house, on account of your troubles, only think about this one thing while you eat. If you had a good man in your life, this would never happen to you and that’s all I’m gonna say.”I laughed for the first time in days.
