---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "D Is for Deadbeat - index_split_010.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - D Is for Deadbeat"
tags: ["know", "said", "like", "daggett", "got", "head", "think", "table", "night", "last", "beer", "ball", "look", "back", "much", "told", "one", "cue", "billy", "maybe", "pocket", "right", "eye", "thought", "shook"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/DIsforDeadbeat-indexsplit010html

---


Unknown
Chapter 9The Hub is a bar with all the ambience of a converted warehouse. The space is too vast for camaraderie, the air too chill for relaxation. The ceiling is high, painted black, and covered with a gridwork of pipes and electrical conduits. The tables in the main room are sparse, the walls lined with old black-and-white photographs of the bar and its various clientele over the years. Through a wide archway is a smaller room with four pool tables. The juke box is massive, outlined in bands of yellow, green, and cherry red, with bubbles blipping through the seams. The place was curiously empty for a Saturday night. A Willie Nelson single was playing, but it wasn’t one I knew.I was the only woman in the bar and I could sense the male attention shift to me with a bristling caution. I paused, feeling sniffed at, as if I were a dog in an alien neighborhood. Cigarette smoke hung in the air, and the men with their pool cues were caught in the hazy light, bent above the tables in silhouette. I identified Billy Polo by the great puff of hair around his head. Upright, he was taller than I’d pictured him, with wide, hard shoulders and slim hips. He was playing pool with a Mexican kid, maybe twenty-two, with a gaunt face, tattooed arms, and a strip of pinched-looking chest which was visible in the gap of the Hawaiian shirt he wore unbuttoned to the waist. He sported maybe six chest hairs in a shallow depression in the middle of his sternum.I crossed to the table and stood there, waiting for Billy to finish his game. He glanced at me with disinterest and lined up the cue ball with the six ball, which he smacked smartly into a side pocket. He moved around the table without pause, lining up the two ball which he fired like a shot into the corner pocket. He chalked his cue, eyeing the three ball. He tested an angle and rejected it, leaning into the table then with a shot that sent the three ball rocketing into the side pocket, while the five ball glanced off the side, rolled into range of the corner pocket, hung there, and finally dropped in. A trace of a smile crossed Billy’s face, but he didn’t look up.Meanwhile, the Mexican kid stood there and grinned at me, leaning on his cue stick. He mouthed, “I love you.” One of his front teeth was rimmed in gold, like a picture frame, and there was a smudge of blue chalk near his chin. Behind him, Billy cleaned up the table and put his cue stick back in the rack on the wall. As he passed, he plucked a twenty from the kid’s shirt pocket and tucked it into his own. Then, with his face averted, he said, “You the chick came looking for me at my mom’s house earlier?”“That’s right. I’m a friend of John Daggett’s.”He cocked his head, squinting, his right hand cupped behind his ear. “Who?”I smiled lazily. We were apparently playing charades. I raised my voice, enunciating. “Daggett. John.”“Oh, yeah, him. How’s he doing these days?” He started snapping his fingers lightly to the music, which had switched from Willie Nelson to a George Benson tune.“He’s dead.”I have to credit him. He did a nice imitation of casual surprise, not overdoing it. “You’re shittin’ me. Daggett’s dead? Too bad. What happened to the dude, heart attack?”“Drowned. It just happened last night, down at the marina.” I wagged a thumb over my shoulder in the direction of the beach so he’d know which marina I meant.“Here in town? Hey, that’s tough. I didn’t know that. He was in L. A. last I heard.”“I’m surprised you didn’t see it on the news.”“Yeah, well I never pay attention to that shit, you know? Bums me out. I got better things to do with my time.”His eyes were all over the place and his body was half turned away. I had to guess that he was busy trying to figure out who I was and what I was up to. He flicked a look at me. “I’m sorry. I didn’t catch your name.”“Kinsey Millhone.”He studied me fleetingly. “I thought my mom said the name was Charlene.”I shook my head. “I don’t know where she got that.”“And you do what?”“Basic research. I free-lance. What’s that got to do with it?”“You don’t look like a friend of Daggett’s. He was kind of a lowlife. You got too much class for a scumbag like him.”“I didn’t say we were close. I met him recently through a friend of a friend.”“Why tell me about it? I don’t give a damn.”“I’m sorry to hear that. Daggett said if anything happened to him, I should talk to you.”“Me? Naww,” he said with disbelief. “That’s fuckin’ weird. You must have got me mixed up with somebody else. I mean, I knew Daggett, but I didn’t know him, you dig?”“That’s funny. He told me you were the best of friends.”He smiled and shook his head. “Old Daggett gave you a bum steer, baby doll. I don’t know nothin’ about it. I don’t even remember when I saw him last. Long time.”“What was the occasion?”He glanced at the Mexican kid who was eavesdropping shamelessly. “Catch you later, man,” he said to him. Then under his breath, with contempt, he said, “Paco.” Apparently, this was a generic insult that applied to all Hispanics.He touched my elbow, steering me into the other room. “These beaners are all the same,” he confided. “Think they know how to play pool, but they can’t do shit. I don’t like talking personal in front of spics. Can I buy you a beer?”“Sure.”He indicated an empty table and held a chair out for me. I hung my slicker over the back and sat down. He caught the bartender’s eye and held up two fingers. The bartender pulled out two bottles of beer which he opened and set on the bar.Billy said, “You want anything else? Potato chips? They make real nice french fries. Kinda greasy, but good.”I shook my head, watching him with interest. At close range, he had a curious charisma... a crude sexuality that he probably wasn’t even aware of. I meet men like that occasionally and I’m always startled by the phenomenon.He ambled over and picked up the beers, dropping a couple of crumpled bills on the bar. He said something to the bartender and then waited while the guy placed a glass upside down on each bottle, shooting a smirk in my direction.He came back to the table and sat down. “Jesus, ask for a glass in this place and they act like you’re puttin’ on airs. Bunch of bohunks. I only hang out here because I got a sister works here three nights a week.”Ah, I thought, the woman in the trailer.He poured one of the beers and pushed it over to me, taking his time then as he poured his own. His eyes were deepset, and he had dimples that formed a crease on either side of his mouth. “Look,” he said, “I can see you got your mind made up I know something I don’t. The truth is, I didn’t like Daggett much and I don’t think he liked me. Where you got this yarn about me bein’ some pal of his, I don’t know, but it wasn’t from him.”“You called him Monday morning, didn’t you?”“Nuh-uh. Not me. Why would I call him?”I went on as though he hadn’t said anything. “I don’t know what you told him, but he was scared.”“Sorry I can’t help you out. Must have been somebody else. What was he doin’ up here anyway?”“I don’t know. His body washed up in the surf this morning. I thought maybe you could fill me in on the rest. Do you have any idea where he was last night?”“Nope. Not a clue.” He’d gotten interested in a speck of dust in the foam on his beer and he had to pick that out.“When did you see him last? I don’t think you said.”His tone became facetious. “Geez, I don’t have my Day-Timer with me. Otherwise, I could pin it down. We might’ve had lunch at some little out of the way place, just him and me.”“San Luis perhaps?”There was a slight pause and his smile dimmed a couple of watts. “I was at San Luis with him,” he said, cautiously. “Me and thirty-seven hundred other guys. So what?”“I thought maybe you’d kept in touch.”“I can tell you didn’t know Daggett too good. Being with him is like walking around with dog-do on your shoe, you know? It’s not something you’d seek out.”“Who else did he know here in town?”“Can’t help you there. It’s not my week to keep track.”“What about your sister? Did he know her?”“Coral? No way. She don’t hang out with bums like that. I’d break her neck. I don’t get why you’re goin’ on and on about this. I told you I don’t know nothin’. I didn’t see him, didn’t hear from him. Why can’t you just take my word for it?”“Because I don’t think you’re telling the truth.”“Says who? I mean, you came lookin’ for me, remember? I don’t have to talk to you. I’m doin’ you a favor. I don’t know who you are. I don’t even know what the fuck you’re up to.”I shook my head, smiling slightly. “God, Billy. Such foul talk. I didn’t think you dealt with women that way. I’m shocked.”“Now you’re makin’ fun of me, right?” He scrutinized my face. “You some kind of cop?”I ran my thumbnail down the bottle, snagging an accordion strip of label, which I picked off. “Actually I am.”He snorted. Now he’d heard everything. “Come on. Like what,” he said.“I’m a private investigator.”“Bullshit.”“It’s a fact.”He tipped back in his chair, amused that I’d try to lay such a line on him. “Jesus, you’re too much. Who do you think you’re talkin’ to? I might have been born at night, but it wasn’t last night. I know the private eyes around town and you ain’t one, so try somethin’ else.”I laughed. “All right, I’m not. Maybe I’m just a nosy chick looking into the death of a man I once met.”“Now, that I’d buy, but it still don’t explain why you’re crankin’ on my case.”“You introduced him to Lovella, didn’t you?”That stopped him momentarily. “You know Lovella?”“Sure. I met her down in L. A. She has an apartment on Sawtelle.”“When was this?”“Day before yesterday.”“No foolin’. And she told you to look me up?”“How else would I know where you were?”He stared at me, going through some sort of mental debate.I thought a little coaxing might loosen his tongue. “Are you aware that Daggett’s been beating the shit out of her?”That made him restless and his eyes dropped away from mine. “Yeah, well Lovella’s a big girl. She has to learn how to take care of herself.”“Why don’t you help her out?”He smiled bitterly. “I know people who’d laugh at the notion of me helping anyone,” he said. “Besides, she’s tough. You don’t want to underestimate that one, I’m tellin’ you.”“You’ve known her a long time, haven’t you?”His knee had started to jump. “Seven years, eight. I met her when she was seventeen. We lived together for a while, but it didn’t work out. We used to knock heads too much. She’s a bullheaded bitch, but I loved her a lot. Then I got busted on a burglary rap and me and her, hell, I don’t know what it was. We wrote to each other for a while, but you can’t go back to something once it’s dead, you know? Anyway, now we’re friends, I guess. At least I dig her. I don’t know how she feels about me.”“Have you seen her recently?”The knee stopped. “No, I haven’t seen her recently,” he said. “What about you? Why’d you go down there?”“I was looking for Daggett. The phone was disconnected.”“What exactly did she say?”I shrugged. “Nothing much. I wasn’t there long and she wasn’t feeling that good. She was nursing a big black eye.”“Jesus,” he said. He rocked back in his chair. “Tell me something. How come women do that? Let guys punch ’em out?”“I have no idea.”He drained his beer glass and set it down. “I bet you don’t take crap from anyone, am I right?”“We all take crap from someone,” I said.Billy got up. “Sorry to cut this off, but I gotta split.” He turned, tucking his shirt down into his pants more securely. His body language said he’d already taken off and hoped his clothing would catch up with him by the time he hit the street.I got up, reaching for my slicker. “You’re not leaving town, are you?”“What business is it of yours?”“It doesn’t seem like a good idea with Daggett’s death hanging fire. Suppose the cops want to talk to you.”“About what?”“Where you were last night, for starters.”His tone rose. “Where/was? What are you talkin’ about?”“They might want to know about the connection between Daggett and you.”“What connection? That’s a crock. I don’t know where you come up with that.”“It’s not me you have to worry about. It’s the cops who count.”“What cops?”I shook my head. “You know who your friendly local cops are,” I said. “If somebody puts a bug in the wrong ear, you’ll be sitting in the hot seat.”He was all outrage. “Why would you do that to me?”“Because you’re not leveling with me, William.”“I am leveling with you! I’ve told you everything I know.”“I don’t think so. I think you knew about Daggett’s death. I think you saw him this week.”He put his hands on his hips and looked off across the room, shaking his head. “Man, this is all I need. This is no lie. I’ve been straight. I’m minding my own business, doing like I been told. I didn’t even know the dude was up here.”“You can stick to your story if you like,” I said, “but I’ll give you a word of advice. I’ve got the license number of that car you bought. You bolt and I’m calling Lieutenant Dolan down at Homicide.”He seemed as much puzzled as dismayed. “What is this? A shakedown? Is that what this is about?”“What’s to shake? You don’t have a cent. I want information, that’s all.”“I don’t have any information. How many times I gotta tell you that?”“Look,” I said patiently. “Why don’t I let you think about the situation and then we can talk again.”“Why don’t you go fuck yourself!”I put my slicker on, tucking the strap of my handbag over my shoulder. “Thanks for the beer. I’ll buy yours next time.”He made an exaggerated gesture of dismissal, too pissed off to reply. He headed toward the door and I watched him go. I glanced at my watch. It was well after midnight and I was exhausted. My head was starting to ache and I knew everything about me smelled like stale cigarette smoke. I wanted to go home, strip down, shower, and then crawl into the folds of my quilt. Instead, I took a deep breath and went after him.
