---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "D Is for Deadbeat - index_split_003.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - D Is for Deadbeat"
tags: ["like", "said", "know", "one", "got", "want", "daggett", "check", "limardo", "took", "back", "apartment", "man", "get", "coffee", "two", "guess", "might", "could", "first", "phone", "building", "seemed", "much", "face"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/DIsforDeadbeat-indexsplit003html

---


Unknown
Chapter 2I left the Ventura Freeway at Sherman Oaks, taking the San Diego Freeway south as far as Venice Boulevard. I exited, turning right at the bottom of the off-ramp. According to my calculations, the address I wanted was somewhere close. I doubled back toward Sawtelle, the street that hugs the freeway on a parallel route.Once I saw the building, I realized that I’d spotted the rear of it from the freeway as I passed. It was painted the color of Pepto-Bismol and sported a sagging banner of Day-Glo orange that said NOW RENTING. The building was separated from the roadway by a concrete rain wash and protected from speeding vehicles by a ten-foot cinderblock wall sprayed with messages for passing motorists. Spiky weeds had sprung up along the base of the wall and trash had accumulated like hanging ornaments in the few hearty bushes that managed to survive the gas fumes. I had noted the building because it seemed so typical of L. A.: bald, cheaply constructed, badly defaced. There was something meanspirited about its backside, and the entrance turned out to be worse.The street was largely made up of California “bungalows,” small two-bedroom houses of wood and stucco with ragged yards and no trees. Most of them had been painted in pastel hues, odd shades of turquoise and mauve, suggestive of discount paints that hadn’t quite covered the color underneath. I found a parking space across the street and locked my car, then crossed to the apartment complex.The building was beginning to disintegrate. The stucco looked mealy and dry, the aluminum window frames pitted and buckling. The wrought-iron gate near the front had been pulled straight out of the supporting wall, leaving holes large enough to stick a fist into. Two apartments at street level were boarded up. The management had thoughtfully provided a number of garbage bins near the stairs, without (apparently) paying for adequate trash removal services. A big yellow dog was scratching through this pile of refuse with enthusiasm, though all he seemed to net for his efforts was a quarter moon of pizza. He trotted off, the rim of crust clenched in his jaws like a bone.I moved into the shelter of the stairs. Most of the mailboxes had been ripped out and mail was scattered in the foyer like so much trash. According to the address on the face of the check, Limardo lived in apartment 26, which I surmised was somewhere above. There were apparently forty units, only a few marked with the occupants’ names. That seemed curious to me. In Santa Teresa, the post office won’t even deliver junk mail unless a box is provided, clearly marked, and in good repair. I pictured the postman, emptying out his mail pouch like a wastepaper basket, escaping on foot then before the inhabitants of the building swarmed over him like bugs.The apartments were arranged in tiers around a courtyard “garden” of loose gravel, pink paving stones, and nut grass. I picked my way up the cracked concrete steps.At the second-floor landing, a black man was seated in a rickety metal folding chair, whittling with a knife on a bar of Ivory soap. There was a magazine open on his lap to catch the shavings. He was heavyset and shapeless, maybe fifty years old, his short-cropped frizzy hair showing gray around his ears. His eyes were a muddy brown, the lid of one pulled askew by a vibrant track of stitches that cut down along his cheek.He took me in at a glance, turning his attention then to the sculpture taking form in his hands. “You must be looking for Alvin Limardo,” he said.“That’s right,” I said, startled. “How’d you guess?”He flashed a smile at me, showing perfect teeth, as snowy as the soap he carved. He tilted his face up at me, the injured eye creating the illusion of a wink. “Baby, you ain’t live here. I know ever’body live here. And from the look on your face, you ain’t thinkin’ to rent. If you knew where you were going, you’d be headed straight there. Instead, you be lookin’ all around like somethin’ might jump out on you, including me,” he said and then paused to survey me. “I’d say you do social work, parole, something like that. Maybe welfare.”“Not bad,” I said. “But why Limardo? What made you think I was looking for him?”He smiled then, his gums showing pink. “We all Alvin Limardo ‘round here. It’s a joke we play. Just a name we take when we jivin’ folk. I been Alvin Limardo myself lass week at the food stamp line. He get welfare checks, disability, AFDC. Somebody show up lass week wid a warrant on him. I tole ’em, ‘Alvin Limardo’s done leff. He gone. Ain’t nobody here by that name about now.’ The Alvin Limardo you want... he be white or black?”“White,” I said and then described the man who’d come into my office on Saturday. The black man started nodding about halfway through, his knife blade still smoothing the surface of the soap. It looked like he’d carved a sow lying on her side with a litter of piglets scrambling over her to nurse. The whole of it couldn’t have been more than four inches long.“That’s John Daggett. Whooee. He bad. He the one you want, but he gone for sure.”“Do you have any idea where he went?”“Santa Teresa, I heard.”“Well, I know he was up there last Saturday. That’s where I ran into him,” I said. “Has he been back since then?”The man’s mouth drooped with skepticism. “I seen him on Monday and then he gone off again. Only other peoples must want him too. He ack like a man who’s runnin’ and don’t want to be caught. What you want wid him?”“He wrote me a bum check.”He shot me a look of astonishment. “You take a check from a man like that? Lord God, girl! What’s the matter wid you?”I had to laugh. “I know. It’s my own damn fault. I thought maybe I could catch him before he skipped out permanently.”He shook his head, unable to sympathize. “Don’t take nothin’ from the likes of him. That’s your first mistake. Comin’ ‘round this place may be the next.”“Is there anybody here who might know how to get in touch with him?”He pointed the blade of his knife toward an apartment two doors down. “Axe Lovella. She might know. Then again, she might not.”“She’s a friend of his?”“Not hardly. She’s his wife.”I felt somewhat more hopeful as I knocked at apartment 26. I was afraid he’d moved out altogether. The door was a hollowcore with a hole kicked into the bottom about shin high. The sliding glass window was open six inches, a fold of drapery sticking out. A crack ran diagonally across the pane, held together by a wide band of electrician’s tape. I could smell something cooking inside, kale or collard greens, with a whisper of vinegar and bacon grease.The door opened and a woman peered out at me. Her upper lip was puffy, like the kind of scrape children get falling off bicycles when they first learn to ride. Her left eye had been blackened not long ago and it was streaked now with midnight blue, the surrounding tissue a rainbow of green and yellow and gray. Her hair was the color of hay, parted in the middle and snagged up over each ear with a bobby pin. I couldn’t even guess how old she might be. Younger than I expected, given John Daggett’s age, which had to be fifty plus.“Lovella Daggett?”“That’s right.” She seemed reluctant to admit that much.“I’m Kinsey Millhone. I’m looking for John.”She licked uneasily at her upper lip as if she was still unfamiliar with its new shape and size. Some of the scraped area had formed a scab, which resembled nothing so much as half a moustache. “He’s not here. I don’t know where he’s at. What’d you want him for?”“He hired me to do some work, but he paid me with a bum check. I was hoping we could get it straightened out.”She studied me while she processed the information. “Hired you to do what?”“Deliver something.”She didn’t believe a bit of that. “You a cop?”“No.”“What are you, then?”I showed her the photostat of my license by way of reply. She turned and walked away from the door, leaving it open behind her. I gathered this was her method of inviting me in.I stepped into the living room and closed the door behind me. The carpeting was that green cotton shag so admired by apartment owners everywhere. The only furniture in the room was a card table and two plain wooden chairs. A six-foot rectangle of lighter carpeting along one wall suggested that there’d once been a couch on the spot, and a pattern of indentations in the rug indicated the former presence of two heavy chairs and a coffee table, arranged in what decorators refer to as “a conversational grouping.” Instead of conversation these days, Daggett apparently got right down to busting her chops, breaking anything else that came to hand. The one lamp I saw had been snapped off at the socket and the wires were hanging out like torn ligaments.“Where’d the furniture go?”“He hocked it all last week. Turns out he used the payments for his bar bill. The car went before that. It was a piece of junk, anyway, but I’d paid for it. You ought to see what I’ve got for a bed these days. Some peed-on old mattress he found out on the street.”There were two bar stools at the counter and I perched on one, watching as Lovella ambled into the small space that served as a kitchen. An aluminum saucepan sat on a gas flame on the stove, the water in it boiling furiously. On one of the other back burners, there was a battered aluminum kettle filled with simmering greens.Lovella wore blue jeans and a plain white tee shirt wrong-side out, the Fruit of the Loom label visible at the back of her neck. The bottom of the shirt had been pulled tight and knotted to form a halter, leaving her midriff bare. “You want coffee? I was just fixing some.”“Yes, please,” I said.She rinsed a cup under the hot water faucet and gave it a quick swipe with a paper towel. She set it on the counter and spooned instant coffee into it and then used the same paper towel as a potholder when she reached for the saucepan. The water sputtered against the edge; of the pan as she poured. She added water to a second cup, gave a quick stir to the contents, and pushed it toward me with the spoon still resting up against the rim.“Daggett’s a jerk. They should lock him up for life,” she remarked, almost idly, I thought.“Did he do that to you?” I asked, my gaze flicking across her bruised face.She fixed a pair of dead gray eyes on me without bothering to reply. Up close, I could see that she wasn’t much more than twenty-five. She leaned forward, resting her elbows on the counter, her coffee cup cradled in her hands. She wasn’t wearing a bra and her breasts were big, as soft and droopy as balloons filled with water, her nipples pressing against the tee-shirt fabric like puckered knots. I wondered if she was a hooker. I’d known a few with the same careless sexuality-all surface, no feeling underneath.“How long have you been married?”“You care if I have a cigarette?”“It’s your place. You can do anything you want,” I said.That netted me a wan smile, the first I’d seen. She reached for a pack of Pall Mall 100s, flipped on the gas burner, and lit her cigarette from it, tilting her head so her hair wouldn’t catch fire. She took a deep drag and exhaled it, blowing a cloud of smoke at me. “Six weeks,” she said, answering my question belatedly. “We were pen pals after he got sent to San Luis. Wrote for a year and then I married him the minute he got out. Dumb? Jesus. Can you believe I did that?”I shrugged noncommittally. She didn’t really care if I believed it or not. “How’d you connect in the first place?”“A buddy of his. Guy named Billy Polo I used to date. They’d sit and talk about women and my name came up. I guess Billy made me sound like real hot stuff, so Daggett got in touch.”I took a sip of my coffee. It had that flat, nearly sour taste of instant, with tiny clumps of coffee powder floating at the edge. “Do you have any milk for this?”“Oh, sure. Sorry,” she said. She moved over to the refrigerator where she took out a small can of Carnation.It wasn’t quite what I had in mind, but I added some to my coffee, intrigued as evaporated milk rose to the surface in a series of white dots. I wondered if a fortune teller could read the pattern, like tea leaves. 1 thought I spied some indigestion in my future, but I wasn’t sure.“Daggett’s a charmer when he wants,” she said. “Give him a couple of drinks, though, and he’s mean as a snake.”That was a story I’d heard before. “Why don’t you leave?” said I, as I always do.“Because he’d come after me is why,” she said snappishly. “You don’t know him. He’d kill me without giving it a second thought. Same thing if I called the cops. Talk back to that man and he’ll punch your teeth down your throat. He hates women is what’s the matter with him. Of course, when he sobers up, he can charm your socks off. Anyway, I’m hoping he’s gone for good. He got a phone call Monday morning and he was out of here like a shot. I haven’t heard from him since. Of course, the phone was disconnected yesterday so I don’t know how he’d reach me even if he wanted to.”“Why don’t you talk to his parole officer?”“I guess I could,” she said reluctantly. “He reports to the guy every time he turns around. For two days he had a job, but he quit that. Of course, he’s not supposed to drink. I guess he tried to play by the rules at first, but it was too much.”“Why not get out while you have the chance?”“And go where? I don’t have a nickel to my name.”“There are shelters for battered women. Call the rape crisis center. They’ll know.”She gestured dismissively. “Jesus, I love people like you. You ever had a guy punch you out?”“Not one I was married to,” I said. “I wouldn’t put up with that shit.”“That’s what I used to say, sister, but I’ll tell you what. You don’t get away as easy as all that. Not with a bastard like Daggett. He swears he’d follow me to the ends of the earth and he would.”“What was he in prison for?”“He never said and I never asked. Which was also dumb. It didn’t make any difference to me at first. He was fine for a couple weeks. Just like a kid, you know? And sweet? Lord, he trotted around after me like a puppy dog. We couldn’t get enough of each other and it all seemed just like the letters we wrote. Then he got into the Jack Daniel’s one night and the shit hit the fan.”“Did he ever mention the name Tony Gahan?”“Nuh-uh. Who’s he?”“I’m not sure. Some kid he asked me to find.”“What’d he pay you with? Can I see the check?”I took it out of my handbag and laid it on the counter. I thought it best not to mention the cashier’s check. I didn’t think she’d take kindly to his giving money away. “I understand Limardo is a fabricated name.”She studied the check. “Yeah, but Daggett did keep some money in this account. I think he cleaned it out just before he left.” She took a drag of her cigarette as she handed back the check. I managed to turn my head before she blew smoke in my face again.“That phone call he got Monday, what was it about? Do you know?”“Beats me. I was off at the Laundromat. I got home and he was still on the phone, his face as gray as that dish rag. He hung up quick and then started shovin’ stuff in a duffel. He turned the place upside down lookin’ for his bank book. I was afraid he’d come after me, thinkin’ I took it, but I guess he was too freaked out to worry about me.”“He told you that?”“No, but he was cold sober and his hands were shaking bad.”“You have any idea where he might have gone?”A look flashed through her eyes, some emotion she concealed by dropping her gaze. “He only had one friend and that was Billy Polo up in Santa Teresa. If he needed help, that’s where he’d go. I think he used to have family up there too, but I don’t know what happened to them. He never talked much about that.”“So Polo’s out of prison?”“I heard he got out just recently.”“Well, maybe I’ll track him down since that’s the only lead I have. In the meantime, would you find a phone and call me if you hear from either one?” I took out a business card and jotted my home address and phone on the back. “Call collect.”She looked at both sides of the card. “What do you think is goin’ on?”“I don’t know and I don’t much care. As soon as I run him down, I’ll clean up this business and bail out.”
