---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "D Is for Deadbeat - index_split_006.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - D Is for Deadbeat"
tags: ["said", "like", "daggett", "know", "two", "look", "got", "rain", "one", "eye", "looked", "year", "room", "went", "face", "morgue", "want", "barbara", "time", "line", "hair", "away", "old", "could", "autopsy"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/DIsforDeadbeat-indexsplit006html

---


Unknown
Chapter 5By the time I closed up the office and got down to my car, the clouds overhead looked like dark gray vacuum cleaner fluff and the rain had begun to splatter the sidewalk with polka dots. I stuck Daggett’s file on the passenger seat and backed out of my space, turning right from the parking lot onto Cannon, and right again onto Chapel. Three blocks up, I made a stop, ducking into the supermarket to pick up milk, Diet Pepsi, bread, eggs, and toilet paper. I was into my siege mentality, looking forward to pulling up the drawbridge and waiting out the rain. With luck, I wouldn’t have to go out for days.The phone was ringing as I let myself in. I put the grocery bag on the counter and snatched up the receiver.“God, I was just about to give up,” Jonah said. “I tried the office, but all I got was your answering machine.”“I closed up for the day. I can work at home if I’m in the mood, which I’m not. Have you seen the rain?”“Rain? Oh yeah, so there is. I haven’t even looked out the window since I got in. God, that’s great,” he said. “Listen, I have some of the information you’re looking for and the rest will have to wait. Woody’s got a priority request and I had to back off. I’m working tomorrow so I can pick it up then.”“You’re working Saturday?”“I’m filling in for Sobel. My good deed for the week,” he said. “Got a pencil? Polo’s the one I got a line on.”He rattled out Billy Polo’s age, date of birth, height, weight, hair and eye color, his a.k.a., and a hasty rundown of his record, all of which I noted automatically. He’d picked up the name of Billy’s parole officer, but the guy was out of the office and wouldn’t be available until Monday afternoon.“Thanks. In the meantime, I’m nosing around on my own,” I said. “I bet I’ll get a line on him before you do.” He laughed and hung up.I put groceries away and then sat down at my desk, hauling out the little portable Smith-Corona I keep in the knee hole. I consigned the data Jonah’d given me to index cards and then sat and stared at it. Billy Polo, born William Polokowski, was thirty years old, five-foot-eight, a hundred and sixty pounds, brown hair, brown eyes, no scars, tattoos, or “observable physical oddities.” His rap sheet sounded like a pop quiz on the California Penal Code, with arrests that ranged from misdemeanors to felonies. Assault, forgery, receiving stolen property, grand theft, narcotics violations. Once he was even convicted of “injuring a public jail,” a misdemeanor in this state. Had this occurred in the course of an escape attempt, the charge would have been bumped up to a felony. As it was, he’d probably been caught scratching naughty words on the jail house walls. A real champ, this one.Apparently, Billy Polo was pretty shiftless when it came to breaking the law and had never even settled on an area of expertise. He’d been arrested sixteen times, with nine convictions, two acquittals, five dismissals. Twice, he’d been put on probation, but nothing seemed to have affected the nature of his behavior, which appeared nearly pathological in its thrust. The man was determined to screw up. Since the age of eighteen, he’d spent an accumulated nine years in jail. No telling what his juvenile record looked like. I assumed his acquaintance with John Daggett dated from his latest offense, an armed robbery conviction, for which he’d served two years and ten months at the California Men’s Colony at San Luis Obispo, a medium security facility about ninety miles north of Santa Teresa.I pulled out the telephone book again and checked for a listing under the name Polokowski. Nothing. God, why can’t anything be simple in this business? Oh well. I wasn’t going to worry about it for the moment.By now, I could hear the rain tapping on the glass-enclosed breezeway that connects my place to Henry Pitt’s house. He’s my landlord and has been for nearly two years. In dry weather, he places an old Shaker cradle out there, filled with rising bread. When the sun is out, the space is like a solar oven, warm and sheltered, dough puffing up above the rim of the cradle like a feather pillow. He can proof twenty loaves at a time, then bake them in the big industrial-sized oven he had installed when he retired from commercial baking. Now he trades fresh bread and pastries for services in the neighborhood and stretches his Social Security payments by clipping coupons avidly. He picks up additional income constructing crossword puzzles which he sells to a couple of those pint-sized “magazines” you can purchase in a supermarket checkout line. Henry Pitts is eighty-one years old and everyone knows I’m half in love with him.I considered popping over to see him, but even the fifty-foot walk seemed like too much to deal with in the wet. I put some tea water on and picked up my book, stretching out on the sofa with a quilt pulled over me. And that’s how I spent the rest of the day.During the night, the rain escalated and I woke up twice to hear it lashing at the windows. It sounded like somebody spraying the side of the place with a hose. At intervals, thunder rumbled in the distance and my windows flickered with blue light, tree branches illuminated briefly before the room went black again. It was clear I’d have to cancel my 6:00 A.M. run, an obligatory day off, so I burrowed into the depths of my quilt like a little animal, delighted at the idea of sleeping late.I woke at 8:00, showered, dressed, and fixed myself a soft-boiled egg on toast with lots of Lawry’s Seasoned Salt. I’m not going to give up salt. I don’t care what they say.Jonah called as I was washing my plate. He said, “Hey, guess what? Your friend Daggett showed.”I tucked the receiver into the crook of my neck, turning off the water and drying my hands. “What happened? Did he get picked up?”“More or less. A scruffy drifter spotted him face down in the surf this morning, tangled up in a fishing net. A skiff washed ashore about two hundred yards away. We’re pretty sure it connects.”“He died last night?”“Looks like it. The coroner estimates he went into the water sometime between midnight and five A.M. We don’t have a determination yet on the cause and manner of death. We’ll know more after the autopsy’s done, of course.”“How’d you find out it was him?”“Fingerprints. He was over at the morgue listed as a John Doe until we ran the computer check. You want to take a look?”“I’ll be right there. What about next of kin? Have they been notified?”“Yeah, the beat officer went over as soon as we made the I. D. You know the family?”“Not well, but we’ve met. I wouldn’t want to be quoted on this, but I think you’ll find out he’s a bigamist. There’s a woman down in L. A. who also claims she’s married to him.”“Cute. You better come talk to us when you leave St. Terry’s,” he said and hung up.The Santa Teresa Police Department doesn’t really have a morgue of its own. There’s a coroner-sheriff, an elected officer in this county, but the actual forensic work is contracted out among various pathologists in the tri-county area. The morgue space itself is divided between Santa Teresa Hospital (commonly referred to as St. Terry’s) and the former County General Hospital facility on the frontage road off 101. Daggett was apparently at St. Terry’s, which was where I headed as soon as I’d rounded up my slicker, an umbrella, and my handbag.The visitors’ lot at the hospital was half empty. It was Saturday and doctors would probably be making rounds later in the day. The sky was thick with clouds and, high up, I could see the wind whipping through like a fan, blowing white mist across the gray. The pavement was littered with small branches, leaves plastered flat against the ground. Puddles had formed everywhere, pockmarked by the steady rainfall. I parked as close to the rear entrance as I could and then locked my car and made a dash for it.“Kinsey!”I turned as I reached the shelter of the building. Barbara Daggett hurried toward me from the far side of the lot, her umbrella tilted against the slant of the rain. She was wearing a raincoat and spike-heeled boots, her white-blonde hair forming a halo around her face. I held the door open for her and we ducked into the foyer.“You heard about my father?”“That’s why I’m here. Do you know how it happened?”“Not really. Uncle Eugene called me at eight-fifteen. I guess they tried to notify Mother and he interceded. The doctor has her so doped up it doesn’t make any sense to tell her yet. He’s worried about how she’ll take it, as unstable as she is.”“Is your uncle coming down?”She shook her head. “I said I’d do it. There’s no doubt it’s Daddy, but somebody has to sign for the body so the mortuary can come pick it up. Of course, they’ll autopsy first. How did you find out?”“Through a cop I know. I’d told him I was trying to get a line on your father, so he called me when they got a match on the fingerprints. Did you manage to locate him yesterday?”“No, but it’s clear someone did.” She closed her umbrella and gave it a shake, then glanced at me. “Frankly, I’m assuming somebody killed him.”“Let’s not be too quick off the mark,” I said, though privately, I agreed.The two of us moved through the inner door and into the corridor. The air was warmer here and smelled of latex paint.“I want you to look into it for me, in any event,” she said.“Hey, listen. That’s what the police are for. I don’t have the scope for that. Why don’t you wait and see what they have to say first?”She studied me briefly and then moved on. “They don’t give a damn what happened to him. Why would they care? He was a drunken bum.”“Oh come on. Cops don’t have to care,” I said. “If it’s homicide, they have a job to do and they’ll do it well.”When we reached the autopsy room, I knocked and a young black morgue attendant came out, dressed in surgical greens. His name tag indicated that his name was Hall Ingraham. He was lean, his skin the color of pecan wood with a high-gloss finish. His hair was cropped close and gave him the look of a piece of sculpture, his elongated face nearly stylized in its perfection.“This is Barbara Daggett,” I said.He looked in her direction without meeting her eyes. “You can wait right down here,” he said. He moved two doors down and we followed, pausing politely while he unlocked a viewing room and ushered us in.“It’ll be just a minute,” he said.He disappeared and we took a seat. The room was small, maybe nine by nine, with four blue molded-plastic chairs hooked together at the base, a low wooden table covered with old magazines, and a television screen affixed, at an angle, up in one corner of the room. I saw her gaze flick to it.“Closed circuit,” I said. “They’ll show him up there.”She picked up a magazine and began to flip through it distractedly. “You never really told me why he hired you,” she said. An ad for pantyhose had apparently caught her eye and she studied it as if my reply were of no particular concern.I couldn’t think of a reason not to tell her at this point, but I noticed that I censored myself to some extent, a habit of long standing. I like to hold something back. Once information is out, it can’t be recalled so it’s better to exercise caution before you flap your mouth. “He wanted me to find a kid named Tony Gahan,” I said.That remarkable two-toned gaze came up to meet mine and I found myself trying to decide which eye color I preferred. The green was more unusual, but the blue was clear and stark. The two together presented a contradiction, like the signal at a street corner, flashing Walk and Don’t Walk simultaneously.“You know him?” I asked.“His parents and a younger sister were the ones killed in the accident, along with two other people in the car with them. What did Daddy want with him?”“He said Tony Gahan helped him once when he was on the run from the cops. He wanted to thank him.”Her look was incredulous. “But that’s bullshit!”“So I gather,” I said.She might have pressed for more information, but the television screen flashed with snow at that moment and then flipped over to a closeup of John Daggett. He was lying on a gurney, a sheet neatly pulled up to his neck. He had the blank, plastic look that death sometimes brings, as if the human face were no more than an empty page on which the lines of emotion and experience are transcribed and then erased. He looked closer to twenty years old than fifty-five, with a stubble of beard and hair carelessly arranged. His face was unmarked.Barbara stared at him, her lips parting, her face diffused with pink. Tears rose in her eyes and hung there, captured in the well of her lower lids. I looked away from her, unwilling to intrude any more than I had to. The morgue attendant’s voice reached us through the intercom.“Let me know when you’re done.”Barbara turned away abruptly.“Thank you. That’s fine,” I called. The television screen went dark.Moments later, there was a tap at the door and he reappeared with a sealed manila envelope and a clipboard in hand.“We’ll need to know what arrangements you want made,” he said. He was using that tone of studied neutrality I’ve heard before from those who deal with the bereaved. Its effect is impersonal and soothing, liberating one to transact business without intrusive emotionalism. He needn’t have bothered. Barbara Daggett was a businesswoman, bred to that awesome poise that so unsettles men accustomed to female subservience. Her manner now was smooth and detached, her tone as impassive as his.“I’ve talked to Wynington-Blake,” she said, indicating one of the funeral homes in town. “If you’ll notify them once the autopsy’s done, they’ll take care of everything. Is that form for me?”He nodded and held the clipboard out to her with a pen attached. “A release for his personal effects,” he said.She dashed off a signature as if she were signing an autograph for a pesky fan. “When will you have the autopsy results?”He handed her the envelope, which apparently contained Daggett’s odds and ends. “Probably by late afternoon.”“Who’s doing the post?” I asked.“Dr. Yee. He’s scheduled it for two-thirty.”Barbara Daggett glanced at me. “She’s a private investigator. I want all information released to her. Will I need to sign a separate authorization for that?”“I don’t know. There’s probably some procedure, but it’s a new one on me. I can check into it and contact you later, if you like.”She slipped her business card under the clamp as she handed the clipboard back to him. “Do that.”His eyes met hers for the first time and I could see him register the oddity of the mismatched irises. She brushed past him, moving out of the room. He stared after her. The door closed.I held my hand out. “I’m Kinsey Millhone, Mr. Ingraham.”He smiled for the first time. “Oh yeah. I heard about you from Kelly Borden. Nice to meet you.”Kelly Borden was a morgue attendant I’d met during a homicide investigation I’d worked on in August.“Nice to meet you too,” I said. “What’s the story on this one?”“I can’t tell you much. They brought him in about seven, just as I was coming to work.”“Do you have any idea how long he’d been dead?”“I don’t know for sure, but it couldn’t have been long. The body wasn’t bloated and there wasn’t any putrefaction. From what I’ve seen of drowning victims, I’d guess he went in the water late last night. Don’t quote me on that. The watch he had on was stopped at two thirty-seven, but it could have been broken. It’s a crummy watch and looks all beat up. It’s in with his effects. Hell, what do I know? I’m just a flunkie, lowest of the low. Dr. Yee hates it if we talk to people like this.”“Believe me, I’m not going to say anything. I’m just asking for my own purposes. What about his clothing? How was he dressed?”“Jacket, pants, shirt.”“Shoes and socks?”“Well, shoes. He didn’t have socks on and he didn’t have a wallet or anything like that.”“Any signs of injury?”“None that I’ve seen.”I couldn’t think of anything else I wanted to ask for the moment so I thanked him and said I’d be in touch.Then I went out to look for Barbara Daggett. If I was going to work for her, we needed to get business squared away.
