---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "D Is for Deadbeat - index_split_015.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - D Is for Deadbeat"
tags: ["tony", "said", "like", "westfall", "look", "want", "door", "get", "daggett", "check", "something", "eye", "know", "got", "back", "give", "maybe", "way", "thought", "come", "really", "money", "go", "school", "coke"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/DIsforDeadbeat-indexsplit015html

---


Unknown
Chapter 14By the time I pulled out of the restaurant parking lot, it was 2:00 and the air felt dank. Or maybe it was only the shadowy image of Daggett’s companion that chilled me. I’d been half convinced there was someone with him that night and now I had confirmation-not proof of murder, surely, but some sense of the events leading up to his death, a tantalizing glimpse of his consort, that “other” whose ghostly passage I tracked.From Dinah’s description, Lovella Daggett was the first name that popped into my head. Her trashy blonde looks had made me think she was hooking when I met her in L. A. On the other hand, most of the women I’d run across to date were on the young side and fair-haired-Barbara Daggett, Billy Polo’s sister Coral, Ramona Westfall, even Marilyn Smith, the mother of the other dead child. I’d have to start pinning people down as to their whereabouts the night of the murder, a tricky matter as I had no way to coerce a reply. Cops have some leverage. A P. I. has none.In the meantime, I went by the bank and removed the cashier’s check from my safe deposit box. I ducked into a coffee shop and grabbed a quick lunch, then spent the afternoon in the office catching up on paperwork. At 5:00, I locked up and went home, puttering around until 6:30 when I left for Ferrin and Ramona Westfall’s house to meet Tony Gahan.The Westfalls lived in an area called the Close, a deadend street lined with live oaks over near the Natural History Museum. I drove through stone gates into the dim hush of privacy. There are only eight homes on the cul-de-sac, all Victorian, completely restored, immaculately kept. The neighborhood looks, even now, like a small, rural community inexplicably lifted out of the past. The properties are surrounded by low walls of fieldstone, the lots overgrown with bamboo, pampas grass, and fern. It was fully dark by then and the Close was wreathed in mist. The vegetation was dense, intensely scented, and lush from the recent rain. There was only one street light, its pale globe obscured by the branches of a tree.I found the number I was looking for and parked on the street, picking my way up the path to the front. The house was a putty-colored, one-story wood frame with a wide porch, white shutters and trim. The porch furniture was white wicker with cushions covered in a white-and-putty print. Two Victorian wicker plant stands held massive Boston ferns. All too perfect for my taste.I rang the bell, refusing to peer in through the etched glass oval in the door. I suspected the interior was going to look like something out of House and Garden magazine, an elegant blend of the old, the new, and the offbeat. Of course, my perception was probably colored by Ferrin Westfall’s curt treatment of me and Ramona’s outright hostility. I’m not above holding grudges.Ramona Westfall came to the door and admitted me. I kept my tone pleasant, but I didn’t fall all over myself admiring the place, which, at a glance, did appear to be flawlessly done. She showed me into the front parlor and removed herself, closing the oak-paneled sliding doors behind her. I waited, staring resolutely at the floor. I could hear murmuring in the hall. After a moment, the doors slid open and a man entered, introducing himself as Ferrin Westfall... as if I hadn’t guessed. We shook hands.He was tall and slim, with a cold, handsome face and silver hair. His eyes were a dark green, as empty of warmth as the harbor. There were hints of something submerged in the depths, but no signs of life. He wore charcoal gray pants and a soft gray cashmere sweater that fairly begged to be stroked. He indicated that I should have a seat, which I did.He surveyed me for a moment, taking in the boots, the faded jeans, the wool sweater beginning to pill at the elbows. I was determined not to let his disapproval get through to me, but it required an effort on my part. I stared at him impassively and warded off his withering assessment by picturing him on the toilet with his knickers down around his ankles.Finally, he said, “Tony will be out in a moment. Ramona’s told me about the check. I wonder if I might examine it.”I removed the check from my jeans pocket and smoothed it out, passing it to him for his inspection. I wondered if he thought it was forged, stolen, or in some way counterfeit. He scrutinized it, fore and aft, and returned it, apparently satisfied that it was legitimate.“Why did Mr. Daggett come to you with this?” he asked.“I’m not really sure,” I said. “He told me he’d tried to find Tony at an old address. When he had no luck, he asked me to track him down and deliver it.”“Do you know how he acquired the money?”Again, I found myself feeling protective. It was really none of this man’s business. He probably wanted to assure himself that Daggett hadn’t come by the money through some tacky enterprise-drugs, prostitutes, selling dogs and kitty cats to labs for medical experiments.“He won it at the track,” I said. Personally, I hadn’t quite believed this part of Daggett’s tale, but I didn’t mind if Ferrin Westfall got sucked in. He didn’t seem any more convinced than I. He shifted the subject.“Would you prefer to be alone with Tony?”I was surprised at the offer. “Yes, I would. I’d really like to go off somewhere with him and have a Coke.”“I suppose that would be all right, as long as you don’t keep him too long. This is a school night.”“Sure. That’s very nice of you.”There was a tap at the door. Mr. Westfall rose and crossed the room. “This will be Tony,” he said.The doors slid back and Tony Gahan came in. He looked like an immature fifteen. He was maybe five-foot-six, a hundred and twenty-five pounds. His uncle introduced me. I preferred my hand and we fumbled through a handshake. Tony’s eyes were dark, his hair a medium brown, attractively cut, which struck me as odd. Most of the high school kids I’ve seen lately look like they’re being treated for the same scalp disease. I suspected Tony’s hairstyle was a concession to Ferrin Westfall’s notions of good taste and I wondered how that sat with him.His manner was anxious. He seemed like a kid trying desperately to please. He shot a cautious look at his uncle, searching for visual cues as to what was expected of him and how he was meant to behave. It was painful to watch.“Miss Millhone would like to take you out for a Coke, so she can talk to you,” Mr. Westfall said.“How come?” he croaked. Tony looked like he was going to drop dead on the spot and I remembered in a flash how much I’d hated eating and drinking in the presence of strange adults when I was his age. Meals represent a series of traps when you haven’t yet mastered the appropriate social skills. I hated adding to his distress, but I was convinced I’d never have a decent conversation with him in this house.“She’ll explain all that,” Mr. Westfall said. “Obviously, you’re not required to go. If you’d prefer to stay here, simply say so.”Tony seemed unable to get a reading from his uncle’s statement, which was neutral on the surface, but contained some tricky side notes. It was the word “simply” that tripped him, I thought, and the “obviously” didn’t help.Tony glanced at me with a half shrug. “It’s okay, I guess. Like, right now?”Mr. Westfall nodded. “It won’t be for long. You’ll need a jacket, of course.”Tony moved out into the hall and I followed, waiting until he found his jacket in the hall closet.At fifteen, I thought he could probably figure out if he needed a jacket or not, but neither of them consulted me on the subject. I opened the front door and held it while he went out. Mr. Westfall watched us for a moment and then closed the door behind us. God, it was just like a date. I nearly swore I’d have him home by 10:00. Absurd.We made our way down the path in the dark. “You go to Santa Teresa High School?”“Right.”“What year?”“Sophomore.”We got in the car. Tony tried to roll down the smashed window on his side without much success. A shard of glass tinkled down into the door frame. He finally gave up.“What happened to this?”“I was careless,” I said, and let it go at that,.I did a U-turn in the lane and I headed for the Clockworks on State Street, a teen hangout generally regarded as seedy, unclean, and corrupt, which it is... a training ground for junior thugs. Kids come here (stoned, no doubt) to drink Cokes, smoke clove cigarettes, and behave like bad-asses. I’d been introduced to the place by a seventeen-year-old pink-haired dope dealer named Mike, who made more money than I did. I hadn’t seen him since June, but I tend to look for him around town.We parked in a small lot out back and went in through the rear entrance. The place is long and narrow, painted charcoal gray, the high ceiling rimmed with pink and purple neon. A series of mobiles, looking like big black clock gears, revolve in the smoky air. The noise level, on weekends, is deafening, the music so loud it makes the floor vibrate. On week nights, it’s quiet and oddly intimate. We found a table and I went over to the counter to pick up a couple of Cokes. There was a tap on my shoulder and I turned to find Mike standing there. I felt a rush of warmth. “I was just thinking about you!” I said. “How are you?”A pink tint crept across his cheeks and he gave me a slow seductive smile. “I’m okay. What are you doin’ these days?”“Nothing much,” I said. “Great hair.” Formerly, he’d sported a Mohawk, a great cockscomb of pink down the center of his head, with the sides shaved close. Now it was arranged in a series of purple spurts, each clump held together with a rubber band, the feathery tips bleached white. Aside from the hair, he was a good-looking kid, clear skin, green eyes, good teeth.I said, “Actually, I’m about to have a talk with that guy over there... a schoolmate of yours.”“Yeah?” He turned and gave Tony a cursory inspection.“You know him?”“I’ve seen him. He doesn’t hang out with the kind of people I do.” His gaze returned to Tony and I thought he was going to say more, but he let it pass.“What are you up to?” I asked. “Still dealing?”“Who me? Hey, no. I told you I’d quit,” he said, sounding faintly righteous. The look in his eyes, of course, suggested just the opposite. If he was doing something illegal, I didn’t want to know about it anyway, so I bypassed the subject.“What about school? You graduate this year?”“June. I got college applications out and everything.”“Really?” I couldn’t tell if he was putting me on or not.He caught the look. “I get good grades,” he protested. “I’m not just your average high school dunce, you know. The bucks I got, I could go anyplace I want. That’s what private enterprise is about.”I had to laugh. “For sure,” I said. The “bar maid” set two Cokes on the counter and I paid her. “I have to get back to my date.”“Nice seeing you,” he said. “You ought to come in sometime and talk to me.”“Maybe I’ll do that,” I said. I smiled at him, mentally shaking my head. Flirtatious little shit. I moved over to the table where Tony was sitting. I handed him a Coke and sat down.“You know that guy?” Tony asked cautiously.“Who, Mike? Yes, I know him.”Tony’s eyes strayed to Mike and back again, resting on my face with something close to respect. Maybe I wasn’t such a geek after all.“Did your uncle tell you what this is about?” I asked.“Some. He said the accident and that old drunk.”“You feel okay discussing it?”He shrugged by way of reply, avoiding eye contact.“I take it you weren’t in the car,” I said.He smoothed the front of his hair to the side. “Uh-uh. Me and my mom got into this argument. They were going to my granny’s for this Easter egg hunt and I didn’t want to go.”“Your grandmother’s still in town someplace?”He shifted in his chair. “In a rest home. She had a stroke.”“She’s your mother’s mother?” I didn’t care particularly about any of this. I was just hoping the kid would relax and open up.“Yeah.”“What’s it like living with your aunt and uncle?”“Fine. No big deal. He comes down on my case all the time, but she’s nice.”“She said you were having some problems at school.”“So?”“Just curious. She says you’re very smart and your grades are in the toilet. I wondered what that was about.”“It’s about school sucks,” he said. “It’s about I don’t like people butting into my fuckin’ business.”“Really,” I said. I took a sip of Coke. His hostility was like a sewer backing up and I thought I’d give the efflux a chance to subside. I didn’t care if he cussed. I could outcuss him any day of the week.When I didn’t react, he filled the silence. “I’m trying to get my grades pulled up,” he said somewhat grudgingly. “I had to take all this bullshit math and chemistry. That’s why I didn’t do good.”“What’s your preference? English? Art?”He hesitated. “You some kind of shrink?”“No. I’m a private investigator. I assumed you knew that.”He stared at me. “I don’t get it. What’s this got to do with the accident?”I took out the check and laid it on the table. “The man responsible wanted me to look you up and give you this.”He picked the check up and glanced at it.“It’s a cashier’s check for twenty-five thousand dollars,” I said.“What for?”“I’m not really sure. I think John Daggett was hoping to make restitution for what he did.”Tony’s confusion was clear and so was the anger that accompanied it. “I don’t want this,” he said. “Why give it to me? Megan Smith died too, you know, and so did that other guy, Doug. Are they gettin’ money too, or just me?”“Just you, as far as I know.”“Take it back then. I don’t want it. I hate that old bastard.” He tossed the check on the table and gave it a push.“Look. Now just wait and let me say something first. It’s your choice. Honestly. It’s up to you. Your aunt was offended by the offer and I understand that. No one can force you to accept the money if you don’t want it. But just hear me out, okay?”Tony was staring off across the room, his face set.I lowered my voice. “Tony, it’s true John Daggett was a drunk, and maybe he was a totally worthless human being, but he did something he felt bad about and I think he was trying to make up for it. Give him credit for that much and don’t say no without giving it consideration first.”“I don’t want money for what he did.”“I’m not done yet. Just let me finish this.”His mouth trembled. He made a dash at his eyes with the sleeve of his jacket, but he didn’t get up and walk away.“People make mistakes,” I said. “People do things they never meant to do. He didn’t kill anyone deliberately...”“He’s a fuckin’ drunk! He was out on the fuckin’ street at fuckin’ nine in the morning. Dad and Mom andHilary...” His voice broke and he fought for control. “I don’t want anything from him. I hate his guts and I don’t want his crummy check.”“Why don’t you cash it and give it all away?”“No! You take it. Give it back to him. Tell him I said he could get fucked.”“I can’t. He’s dead. He was killed Friday night.”“Good. I’m glad. I hope somebody cut his heart out. He deserved it.”“Maybe so. But it’s still possible that he felt something for you and wanted to give you back some of what he took away.”“Like what? It’s done. They’re all dead.”“But you’re not, Tony. You have to find a way to get on with life...”“Hey! I’m doing that, okay? But I don’t have to listen to this bullshit! You said what you had to say and now I want to go home.”He got up, radiating rage, his whole body stiff. He moved swiftly toward the rear entrance, knocking chairs aside. I snatched up the check and followed.When I reached the parking lot, he was kick-boxing the remaining glass out of the smashed window of my car. I started to protest and then I stopped myself.Oh why not, I thought. I had to replace the damn thing anyway. I stood and watched him without a word. When he was done, he leaned against the car and wept.
