---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "E Is for Evidence - index_split_022.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - E Is for Evidence"
tags: ["daniel", "car", "like", "knew", "bass", "lyda", "case", "back", "door", "got", "would", "going", "think", "tape", "one", "felt", "something", "face", "body", "someone", "come", "two", "could", "said", "maybe"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/EIsforEvidence-indexsplit022html

---


Unknown
Chapter 21It took me nearly two hours to find the voice-activated tape recorder which turned out to be hidden on the sun porch that formerly connected my converted garage apartment to the main house. I wasn’t sure how Daniel had gotten in. Perhaps he’d picked the lock, as I would have in his place. The tape was new, which meant he must have been there fairly recently, pulling out the old tape, inserting this one. I couldn’t even remember what was going on when he had first appeared. It was appalling now to think of all the telephone conversations he must have picked up in the last few days. Even messages coming in on my answering machine would have been recorded and passed on, not to mention the lengthy discussion I’d had with him about the case itself. He’d been so interested, so astute in the questions he asked. I’d felt so gratified by his attention. Looking back, I could see that in his own way he’d tried to warn me. All that talk about what a liar he was. Had every word he said to me been false? I sat on my back step, turning the situation over in my mind. Who had put Daniel up to it? Lyda Case perhaps, or maybe Ebony. One or the other of them might have run into Daniel, the amoral, the promiscuous, bored and at loose ends, restless and sick of life. What difference would it make to him who he betrayed? He’d done me in before. One more time couldn’t matter in the grand scheme of things. It was staggering to think of all the information that must have been passed down the line, just by listening in, just by assembling my end of telephone conversations. Maybe that’s how Andy Motycka had figured out Darcy and I were onto him. Something had caused him to cut and run. Olive’s death hadn’t hit the papers until the day after he disappeared. Had he known what was going to happen? I had to find Daniel.I gathered up his guitar, the transmitter, and the tape recorder, shoving everything in the back seat of the car, and then I started cruising the neighborhood, looking for his Rent-A-Ruin. I live one block from the beach in an area made up of motels and vintage California bungalows. I started at Cabana Boulevard and circled each block, checking the cars at every motel, scanning the restaurant parking lots along the beach. There was no sign of him. He’d probably lied about where he was staying, along with everything else.At 5:00, I finally gave up and went home. As usual, I was forced to park several doors away. The intense heat of day was yielding to balminess and it felt like we were in for a warm night ahead. The sun had begun to drop and the combination of January twilight and the summery temperature was disconcerting and set my teeth on edge. I was turning in at my gate when I picked up the smell. Dead dog, I thought. Something fetid and rotten. I looked back at the street, thinking I’d spot some poor flattened creature on the pavement. Instead my attention was caught by the vehicle shrouded by the blue cotton car cover right out in front. I hesitated for a moment and then retraced my steps. The smell was stronger. Saliva began to collect involuntarily on the floor of my mouth. I swallowed, tears welling briefly, a fear reaction of mine. Gingerly, I lifted the car cover, pulling it up off the hood so that I could peer in through the windshield.I jerked my hand away, making one of those sounds that has no translation in human speech.Leaning against the window on the passenger side was the bloated face of Lyda Case, eyes bulging, tongue as fat and round and dark as a parakeet’s, protruding slightly beyond puffy darkened lips. A scarf gaily printed with a surfing motif was nearly buried in the swollen flesh of her neck. I pulled the cover back over the windshield and went straight to my phone where I dialed 911 and reported the body. My voice sounded low and emotionless, but my hands were shaking badly. The sight of Lyda’s face still danced in the air, a vision of death, wed to the smell of putrescence. The dispatcher assured me someone was on the way.I went back out to the street. I sat on the curb to wait for the cops, guarding Lyda’s body like some old loyal pooch. I don’t think four minutes had passed before the black-and-white came barreling around the corner. I got up and moved to the street, holding an arm up like a crossing guard.The two uniformed police who emerged were familiar, Pettigrew and Gutierrez, male and female. I knew they’d seen worse than Lyda Case... what beat cop hasn’t?... but there was something repellent about the spectacle of this death. It looked like she’d been positioned so as to maximize the horror. The message was for me... mockery and macabre arrogance, an escalation of the terms between this killer and me. I hadn’t taken Olive’s death personally. I’d felt the loss, but I didn’t believe I’d been targeted in any way. My presence there when the bomb went off was purely circumstantial. This was different. This was aimed at me. Someone knew where I lived. Someone had made very special arrangements to get her here.The next two hours were filled with police routine, comforting procedures, as formalized as a dance. All of the responsibility belonged to someone else. Lieutenant Dolan appeared. I answered questions. The car turned out to be another rental, Hertz this time instead of Rent-A-Ruin. I’d first seen it this morning, as nearly as I could remember. No, I’d never seen it before. No, I hadn’t seen any strangers in the area. Yes, I knew who she was, but she hadn’t been in touch. No, I had no idea when or why she’d come to town except that she’d told Terry Kohler she had information for him. Dolan had waited with us at the bird refuge so he knew she hadn’t showed up. She was probably already dead by then, her flesh beginning to bake in the toaster oven of the locked car.Out of the corner of my eye, I watched the medical examiner do his preliminary examination of the body. The car doors were hanging open, the neighborhood perfumed by the stink of the corpse. By that time it was fully dark and neighbors were giving the crime scene a wide berth, watching from porches all up and down the street. Some were still in work clothes. Many held handkerchiefs to their faces, filtering the smell. The police personnel working directly with the body wore protective masks. Lights had been set up and the fingerprint technicians were going over every inch of the dark-blue car with white powder and brushes. Door handles, windows, dash, steering wheel, steering column, plastic seat covers. Since the rental car was probably cleaned up between uses, there was a good chance that any prints lifted would be significant. Easy to match, at any rate.Pettigrew had gone into my apartment to contact the Hertz manager by phone.Lyda was zipped into a body bag. The gases that had collected under her skin made her look like she’d suddenly gained fifty pounds, and for a moment, grotesquely, I worried she would burst. I got up abruptly and went inside. I poured myself a glass of wine and chugged it down like water. Officer Pettigrew finished his conversation and hung up the phone.“I’m going in to take a shower if no one objects.” I didn’t wait for an answer. I grabbed a plastic garbage bag from the kitchen, closed myself into the bathroom and stripped, dropping every article of clothing, including my shoes, into the bag. I tied it shut and set it outside the bathroom door. I showered. I shampooed my hair. When I was done, I wrapped myself in a towel, searching my face in the mirror for reassurance. I couldn’t shake the images. Lyda’s features seemed to be superimposed on my own, the stench of her competing with the scent of shampoo and soap. Never had my own mortality seemed so immediate. My ego recoiled, incapable of contemplating its own surcease. There’s nothing so astonishing or insulting to a soul as the suggestion that a day might come when it would not “be.” Thus springs religion with comforts I couldn’t accept.By 9:00 the neighborhood had cleared again. Several prints, including a partial palm, had been lifted from the car, which had then been towed to the impound lot. The Hertz manager had appeared on the scene and the finger-print technician had taken a set of his prints, as well as mine, for comparison. The crime-scene investigators would dust and vacuum the car like a crew of charwomen and then they’d begin the painstaking business of analyzing trace evidence.In the meantime, I was too restless to stay at home. Any sense of refuge and safety I felt had been obliterated by the angle of Lyda’s face, tilted so she seemed to be watching my gate. I hunched myself into a windbreaker and grabbed my handbag, depositing the sackful of fouled clothes in Henry’s trash can on my way out. I cruised the neighborhood again, looking for Daniel’s car, covering the same restaurant parking lots, the same motels. I still had his guitar in the back seat and I didn’t think he’d skip out of town without retrieving it.I hit pay dirt at the Beach View, which in fact only had a view of the backside of the adjacent motel. Daniel’s ratty rented vehicle was parked in front of room 16, ground floor, rear. Parked beside it was a little red Alfa-Romeo convertible. Uneasily I turned to stare at it as I pulled in. I locked my car, pausing to check the glove compartment in the Alfa for the owner registration slip. Not surprisingly, the car belonged to Ashley Wood. My, my, my.I knocked on Daniel’s door. I could see that the lights were on, but there was a long wait. I was beginning to think they might have gone off somewhere on foot when the door opened and Daniel peered out. He was barefoot and shirtless, but he’d pulled on a pair of faded jeans. He looked slim-hipped and bronzed, his blond hair tousled as if he’d been asleep. His cheeks were flushed and the lines had been eased from around his eyes. He looked ten years younger, the haggard cast to his face magically erased. If he was surprised to see me, he gave no indication of it.“Mind if I come in?” I asked.He hesitated slightly and then stepped aside. I moved into the room, noting with grim amusement that the bathroom door was shut. The musky smell of sex still hung in the air like ozone after a rainstorm.“I have your guitar in my car.”“You didn’t have to do that. I told you I’d pick it up.”“It’s no problem. I wanted to talk to you again, anyway.” I strolled around the room, noting the roach clip, the darkened stub of a joint in the ashtray. “God, you got right to it, didn’t you?” I remarked.His gaze was watchful. He knew me well enough to realize I was in a mean mood. He said, “What’s on your mind? I’m kind of tied up right now.”I smiled, wondering if he meant that literally. Bondage had never been part of his sexual repertoire, but who knew how Ash’s taste ran? “I found the transmitter. The tape recorder’s in the car along with the guitar. I thought I might dump it all off the pier, but I’m too nice. I give you credit for balls, Daniel. It took a lot of fuckin’ nerve to come waltzing back in my life and betray me again.”His expression altered, but at least he had the decency not to deny anything.I moved to the bathroom door and opened it.Bass was standing there. Something like pain shot through me, followed by the cessation of all feeling. Even rage was washed away in that moment of recognition. I thought about the last time I’d seen them together... Bass’s twenty-first birthday party at the country club. Daniel’s jazz combo had played for the occasion and I’d been invited, too, since I knew Ash. Two weeks later, Daniel was gone, without so much as a by-your-leave. I was looking at the reason. Who, I wondered, had seduced whom. Daniel was older than Bass by thirteen years, but that wasn’t necessarily relevant. Not that it mattered anyway. Passion had ionized all the air in the room. I felt nearly giddy as I drank it in.Bass had a towel wrapped around his waist. I found myself checking out the body Daniel found preferable to mine. Bass was pale, narrow through the chest, but he carried himself with perfect composure as he brushed by me.“Hello, Kinsey.” He paused at the ashtray and picked up the roach. He tilted his head, lighting it with a disposable Bic. He took a hit and held it out to Daniel, who declined with a slight shake of his head. The two men locked eyes, exchanging a look so filled with tenderness I had to drop my gaze.Bass glanced over at me. “What brings you here?”“Lyda Case is dead.”“Who?”“Come on, Bass. Don’t give me that shit. She was married to Hugh Case, who worked for Wood/Warren. Surely, you haven’t forgotten him so soon.”Bass set the roach aside and moved to the bed. He stretched out, crossing his arms behind his head. The hair in his armpits was silky and black and I could see bite marks in the crook of his neck. When he spoke, his tone was mild and relaxed. “No need to get ugly. I haven’t been around for years. This has nothing to do with me,” he said. “You’re the one.”“I am? That’s bullshit! I got backed into this business because of California Fidelity.”“So I heard. The D. A.’s office got in touch with Mother. You’re being charged with insurance fraud.”“And you believe that,” I said flatly.“Hey, I can understand it. Lance got his tit in a wringer and needed some cash. Burning the warehouse was better than a bank loan. All he needed was a little help from you.”“Oh, really? You seem well informed for someone who’s been gone. Who fills you in?”“What’s it to you?”“You can’t believe everything you hear, Bass. Sometimes you can’t even believe your eyes. There’s something going on here, and none of us has been smart enough to figure out what it is.”“I’m sure you’ll come up with something. I understand you’re very good at what you do.”I looked at Daniel. “How did you get sucked into this, or is that a bad choice of words?”Daniel seemed uncertain how to reply so Bass answered for him. “We had to know what was going on. Obviously, you weren’t going to tell us so we had to take steps.” He paused to shrug. “We’ll be turning the tapes over to the D. A., of course.”“Oh shit, yes. Of course. We who?”“I’d rather not discuss that, in case you’re inclined to retaliate,” Bass said. “The point is, I knew Daniel and he knew you and it seemed like the logical way to gather information.”“And Andy Motycka? How does he fit in?”“I don’t know all the details on that. Why don’t you tell me?”“Well, I don’t know the details either, Bass. My guess is that somebody pressured Andy into it. Maybe he got nervous when he found out that Darcy and I were onto him. Or maybe he got wind of Olive’s death and felt like it was more than he had bargained for. Anyway, it looks like he’s left town unless he’s been murdered, too. Doesn’t it bother you that Lyda Case died?”“Why should it? I never knew the lady personally. Sure, I’m sorry she died, but I didn’t have anything to do with it.”“How do you know you aren’t next, Bass? Or maybe Daniel here? If you’re not concerned about Olive, at least give some thought to your own vulnerability. You’re dealing with someone who has less and less to lose.”“What makes you think he knows who it is?” Daniel said.“What makes you think he doesn’t?” I snapped.
