---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "E Is for Evidence - index_split_019.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - E Is for Evidence"
tags: ["said", "could", "one", "like", "time", "got", "know", "never", "back", "daniel", "well", "andy", "janice", "see", "ever", "apartment", "car", "someone", "something", "looked", "way", "would", "gave", "get", "else"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/EIsforEvidence-indexsplit019html

---


Unknown
Chapter 18I had Darcy drop me off. In an interview situation I prefer to work alone, especially when I’m not quite sure who I’m dealing with. People are easier to manage one on one; there’s more room to ad-lib and more room to negotiate.The apartment building was Spanish style, probably dating from the thirties. The red-tile roof had aged to the color of rust and the stucco had mellowed from stark white to cream. There were clumps of beaky-looking bird of paradise plants in front. A towering, sixty-foot pine tree enveloped the yard in shade. Bougainvillea was massed at the roofline, a tumble of magenta blossoms that spread out along the gutters and trailed like Spanish moss. Wood shutters, painted dark brown, flanked the windows. The loggia was chilly and smelled of damp earth.I knocked at apartment D. There was no sign of Andy’s car on the street, but there was still a possibility that he was here. I had no idea what I’d say if he appeared at the door. It was nearly six and I could smell someone’s supper in the making, something with onions and celery and butter. The door opened and I felt a little lurch of surprise. Andy’s ex-wife was staring out at me.“Janice?” I said, with disbelief.“I’m Lorraine,” she said. “You must be looking for my sister.”Once she spoke, the resemblance began to fade. She had to be in her mid-forties, her good looks just beginning to dehydrate. She had Janice’s blond hair and the same pointed chin, but her eyes were bigger and her mouth was more generous. So was her body. She was my height, probably ten pounds heavier, and I could see where she carried the excess. Her eyes were brown and she’d lined them with black, adding false lashes as dense as paintbrushes. She wore snug white twill shorts and a halter top. Her legs had been shapely once, but the muscles had taken on that stringy look that connotes no exercise. Her tan looked like the comprehensive sort you acquire at a tanning salon-the electric beach.Andy must have been in heaven. I’ve known men who fall in love with the same type of woman over and over again, but the similarities are usually not so obvious. She looked hauntingly like Janice. The difference was that Lorraine was voluptuous where the former Mrs. Motycka tended toward the small, the dry, and the mean. Judging from Andy’s letter, Lorraine was freer with her affections than Janice ever was. She did things to him that made his syntax turn to hiccups. I wondered if his affair with Lorraine came before or after his divorce. Either way, the liaison was dangerous. If Janice found out about it, she would extract a pretty price. It crossed my mind briefly that someone might have used this as leverage to secure his cooperation.“I’m looking for Andy,” I said.“Who?”“Andy Motycka, your brother-in-law. I’m from the insurance company where he works.”“Why look at me? He and Janice are divorced.”“He gave me this address in case I ever needed to get in touch.”“He did?”“Why else would I be here?”She looked at me with suspicion. “How well do you know Janice?”I shrugged. “I don’t really. I used to see her at company parties before they split. When you first opened the door, I thought it was her, you look so much alike.”She took that in and digested it. “What do you want Andy for?”“He disappeared yesterday and no one seems to know where he went. Did he say anything to you?”“Not really.”“Mind if I come in? Maybe we can figure what’s happening.”“All right,” she said reluctantly. “I suppose that’s okay. He never told me he gave anyone this address.”She stepped back and I followed her into the apartment. A small tiled entry dropped down two steps into a large living room. The apartment looked as if it had been furnished from a rental company. Everything was new, handsome, and impersonal. A foot-high live spruce decked with candy canes sat on the glass-and-brass coffee table, but that was the only indication that Christmas had come and gone.Lorraine flicked the television off and motioned me to a chair. The upholstery had the tough, rubbery feel of Scotchgarding. Neither tears, blood, or spilled booze could penetrate such a finish. She sat down, giving the crotch of her shorts a pull so the inseam wouldn’t bury itself in her private parts. “How’d you say you know Andy? Do you work for him?”“Not really for him, but the same company. When did you see him last?”“Three days ago. I talked to him on the phone Thursday night. He was taking his kids on New Year’s Eve so I wasn’t going to see him till late tomorrow anyway, but he always calls, regardless of what’s going on. When I didn’t hear by this morning, I drove out to his place, but there’s no sign of him. Why would you need him New Year’s Day?”I stuck as close to the truth as I could, filling her in on the fact that he’d departed Friday morning without giving any indication where he meant to go. “We need one of the files. Do you know anything about the claim he was working on? There was a fire out at Wood/Warren about a week ago and I think he was doing some of the paperwork.”There was a startled silence and the barriers shot up again. “Excuse me?”“Did he mention that to you?”“What’d you say your name was?”“Darcy. I’m the receptionist. I think I’ve talked to you a couple of times on the phone.”Her manner became formal, circumspect. “I see. Well, Darcy, he doesn’t talk to me about his work. I know he loves the company and he’s fine at what he does.”“Oh, absolutely,” said I. “And he’s very well liked, which is why we were concerned when he went off without a word. We thought maybe some kind of family matter came up. He didn’t say anything about going out of town for a few days?”She shook her head.Judging from her attitude, I was almost certain she knew about the scam. I was equally certain she’d never give a hint of confirmation.She said, “I wish I could help you, but he never said a word to me. In fact, I’d appreciate a call myself when the man turns up. I don’t like to have to sit here and fret.”“I don’t blame you,” I said. “You can reach me at this number if you need to, and I’ll check back with you if I hear anything.” I jotted down Darcy’s name and my telephone number.“I hope nothing’s wrong.” This seemed like the first sincere comment she’d made.“I’m sure not,” I said. Personally, I was betting something had scared the hell out of him and he’d taken off.She’d had a few minutes now to focus on my browless, burned face. “Uh, I hope this doesn’t seem rude, but were you in some kind of accident?”“A gas heater blew up in my face,” I said. She made some sympathetic noises and I hoped the lie wouldn’t come back to haunt me. “Well, I’m sorry I had to bother you on a holiday. I’ll let you know if we hear from him.” I got up and she rose as well, crossing with me to the front door.I walked home through streets beginning to darken, though it was not quite 5:00. The winter sun had sunk and the air temperature was dropping with it. I was exhausted, secretly wishing I could check back into the hospital for the night. Something about the clean white sheets seemed inviting. I was hungry, too, and for once would have welcomed something more nutritious than peanut butter and crackers, which was what I was looking forward to.Daniel’s car was parked at the curb out in front of my apartment. I peered in, half expecting to find him asleep on the back seat. I went in through the gate and around the side of the building to Henry’s backyard. Daniel was sitting on the cinder-block wall that separated Henry’s lot from our neighbor to the right. Daniel, his elbows on his knees, was blowing a low, mournful tune on an alto harmonica. With the cowboy boots, the jeans, and a blue-denim jacket, he might have been out on the range.“‘Bout time you got home,” he remarked. He tucked the harmonica in his pocket and got up.“I had work to do.”“You’re always working. You should take better care of yourself.”I unlocked my front door and went in, flipping on the light. I slung my handbag on a chair and sank down on the couch. Daniel moved into my kitchenette and opened the refrigerator.“Don’t you ever grocery-shop?”“What for? I’m never home.”“Lord.” He took out a stub of butter, some eggs, and a packet of cheese so old it looked like dark plastic around the edge. While I watched, he searched my kitchen cabinets, assembling miscellaneous foodstuffs. I slouched down on my spine, leaning my head against the back of the couch with my feet propped up on the ottoman. I was fresh out of snappy talk and I couldn’t conjure up a shred of anger. This was a man I’d loved once, and though the feelings were gone, a certain familiarity remained.“How come this place smells like feet?” he said idly. He was already chopping onions, his fingers nimble. He played piano the same way, with a careless expertise.“It’s my air fern. Somebody gave it to me as a pet.”He picked up the tag end of a pound of bacon, sniffing suspiciously at the contents. “Stiff as beef jerky.”“Lasts longer that way,” I said.He shrugged and extracted the three remaining pieces of bacon, which he dropped into the skillet with a clinking sound. “God, one thing about giving up dope, food never has tasted right,” he said. “Smoke dope, you’re always eating the best meal you ever had. Helps when you’re broke or on the road.”“You really gave up the hard stuff?”“‘Fraid so,” he said. “Gave up cigarettes, gave up coffee. I do drink a beer now and then, though I notice you don’t have any. I used to go to AA meetings five times a week, but that talk of a higher power got to me in the end. There isn’t any power higher than heroin, you can take my word for it.”I could feel myself drifting off. He was humming to himself, a melody dimly remembered, that blended with the scent of bacon and eggs. What could smell better than supper being cooked by someone else?He shook me gently and I woke to find an omelet on a warmed plate being placed in my lap. I roused myself, suddenly famished again.Daniel sat cross-legged on the floor, forking up eggs while he talked. “Who lives in the house?”“My landlord, Henry Pitts. He’s off in Michigan.”“You got something goin’ with him?”I paused between bites. “The man is eighty-one.”“He have a piano?”“Actually, I think he does. An upright, probably out of tune. His wife used to play.”“I’d like to try it, if there’s a way to get in. You think he’d care?”“Not at all. I’ve got a key. You mean tonight?”“Tomorrow. I gotta be somewhere in a bit.”The way the light fell on his face, I could see the lines near his eyes. Daniel had lived hard and he wasn’t aging well. He looked haggard, a gauntness beginning to emerge. “I can’t believe you’re a private detective,” he said. “Seems weird to me.”“It’s not that different from being a cop,” I said. “I’m not part of the bureaucracy, that’s all. Don’t wear a uniform or punch a time clock. I get paid more, but not as regularly.”“A bit more dangerous, isn’t it? I don’t remember anyone ever tried to blow you up back then.”“Well, they sure tried everything else. Traffic detail, every time you pull someone over, you wonder if the car’s stolen, if the driver’s got a gun. Domestic violence is worse. People drinking, doing drugs. Half the time they’d just as soon waste you as one another. Knock on the door, you never know what you’re dealing with.”“How’d you get involved in a homicide?”“It didn’t start out like that. You know the family, by the way,” I said.“I do?”“The Woods. Remember Bass Wood?”He hesitated. “Vaguely.”“His sister Olive is the one who died.”Daniel set his plate down. “The Kohler woman is his sister? I had no idea. What the hell is going on?”I sketched it out for him, telling him what I knew. If I have a client, I won’t talk about a case, but I couldn’t see the harm here. Just me. It felt good, giving me a chance to theorize to some extent. Daniel was a good audience, asking just the right questions. It felt like old times, the good times, when we talked on for hours about whatever suited us.Finally a silence fell. I was cold and feeling tense. I reached for the quilt and covered my feet. “Why’d you leave me, Daniel? I never have understood.”He kept his tone light. “It wasn’t you, babe. It wasn’t anything personal.”“Was there someone else?”He shifted uneasily, tapping with the fork on the edge of his dinner plate. He set the utensil aside. He stretched his legs out in front of him and leaned back on his elbows. “I wish I knew what to tell you, Kinsey. It wasn’t that I didn’t want you. I wanted something else more, that’s all.”“What?”He scanned my face. “Anything. Everything. What ever came down the pike.”“You don’t have a conscience, do you?”He broke off eye contact. “No. That’s why we were such a mismatch. I don’t have any conscience and you have too much.”“No, not so. If I had a conscience, I wouldn’t tell so many lies.”“Ah, right. The lies. I remember. That was the one thing we had in common,” he said. His gaze came up to mine. I was chilled by the look in his eyes, clear and empty.I could remember wanting him. I could remember looking at his face, wondering if there could ever be a man more beautiful. For some reason I never expect the people I know to have any talent or ability. I’d been introduced to Daniel and dismissed him until the moment I heard him play. Then I did a long double-take, astonished, and I was hooked. There just wasn’t any place to go from there. Daniel was married to his music, to freedom, to drugs, and briefly, to me. I was about that far down on the list.I stirred restlessly. A palpable sexual vapor seemed to rise from his skin, drifting across to me like the scent of woodsmoke half a mile away. It’s a strange phenomenon, but true, that in sleeping with men, none of the old rules apply to a man you’ve slept with before. Operant conditioning. The man had trained me well. Even after eight years, he could still do what he did best... seduce. I cleared my throat, struggling to break the spell. “What’s the story on your therapist?”“No story. She’s a shrink. She thinks she can fix me.”“And this is part of it? Making peace with me?”“We all have delusions. That’s one of hers.”“Is she in love with you?”“I doubt it.”“Must be early in the game,” I said.The dimple appeared and a smile flashed across his face, but it was mirthless, evasive, and I wondered if I hadn’t touched on some pain of his. Now, he was the restless one, glancing at his watch.“I got to get,” he said abruptly. He gathered both plates and the silverware, toting dishes to the kitchen. He’d cleaned up while he cooked, an old habit of his, so he didn’t have much to do. By 7:00, he was gone. I heard the thunder and rattle of his car as he started it and pulled away.The apartment seemed dark. Extraordinarily quiet.I locked up. I took a bath, keeping the water away from my burns. I closed myself into the folds of my quilt and turned out the light. Being with him had brought back the pain in fossil form, evidence of ancient emotional life, embedded now in rock. I studied the sensations as I would some extinct subspecies, for the curiosity, if nothing more.Being married to a doper is as close to loneliness as you can get. Add to that his chronic infidelity and you’ve got a lot of sleepless nights on your hands. There are certain men who rove, men who prowl the night, who simply don’t show up for hours on end. Lying in bed, you tell yourself you’re worried that he’s wrecked the car again, that he’s drunk or in jail. You tell yourself you’re worried he’s been rolled, mugged, or maimed, that he’s overdosed. What really worries you is he might be with someone else. The hours creep by. From time to time, you hear a car approaching, but it’s never his. By 4:00 A.M., it’s a tossup which is uppermost in your mind-wishing he would come home or wishing he were dead.Daniel Wade was the one who taught me how to value solitude. What I endure now doesn’t hold a candle to what I endured with him.
