---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "E Is for Evidence - index_split_015.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - E Is for Evidence"
tags: ["like", "olive", "said", "day", "got", "seemed", "way", "would", "could", "get", "help", "know", "thing", "thought", "bag", "time", "called", "one", "something", "back", "house", "terry", "toward", "year", "new"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/EIsforEvidence-indexsplit015html

---


Unknown
Chapter 14I took a couple of Tylenols and slept like a stone-deep, dreamless sleep that soothed my frazzled nerves and restored my good spirits. I was up at 6:00, ready to jog as usual. There was no sign of Daniel parked at my curb. I did a perfunctory stretch against the fence post and headed toward Cabana Boulevard.The run felt great. The sky was a pearl gray streaked with pink. To my right, a dark-gray surf boomed against the hard-packed sand, leaving snowy froth in its wake. The wharf was mirrored in the glistening pools that remained when the waves receded. The sea seemed to shush the birds that shrieked overhead. This was the last day of the year and I ran with a sense of optimism the new year always brings. I’d find a way to sort it all out: Lance, Mac’s suspicions about me, even Daniel’s sudden appearance on my doorstep. I was alive and healthy, physically fit. Rosie’s would open again on Monday. Henry would be home in another six days. I had the sassy green dress Olive had given me, and maybe a New Year’s invitation if she came through as hoped. I did my three miles and slowed to a walk, cooling off as I headed home.I showered and dressed in jeans as usual, savoring the morning at home. By then it was 7:00-too early for phone calls. I ate my cereal and read the L. A. Times over two cups of coffee. Daniel’s guitar sat in the corner in mute testimony to his renewed presence in my life, but I ignored it for the most part.Darcy called at 7:35 from California Fidelity. She’d done a thorough search. Andy’s office was clean.“Shit,” I said, “What about a typewriter? I was hoping we could get a match on the phony fire department report, but I didn’t find one at his apartment.”“Maybe he keeps it in the trunk of his car.”“Oh, I like that. I’ll see if I can find a way to check that out. In the meantime, keep an eye peeled. Maybe something will surface. Andy’s gotta be tied into this business somehow. It would help a lot to know who he knows at Wood/Warren. Did you go through his Rolodex?”“That won’t help. He knows all those guys because that was his account. He’s bound to have the number handy. I’ll check it out, though. Maybe something else will come to light.” She clicked off.At 8:00, I put a call through to Lyda Case in Texas. Her roommate said she was out of town, maybe in California, but she wasn’t sure. I left my number and asked her to have Lyda get in touch with me if she called home.I called my pal at the credit bureau, but she was out until Monday. I had the feeling the rest of the day was going to come down about the same way. It was New Year’s Eve day. As with Christmas Eve, businesses were closing early, people taking off at noon. Olive called me at 10:00 to say that she was indeed putting together an impromptu cocktail party. “It’s mostly family and a few close friends. Half the people I called already had plans. Are you free? We’d love to have you, if you’re not already tied up.”“Of course I’m not,” I said. “I’d love to come.” I hated to sound so eager, but in truth I was. I didn’t want to spend this New Year’s Eve alone. I was worried Daniel might start looking too good. “Can I bring anything?”“Actually I could use some help,” she said. “I gave the housekeeper the weekend off, so I’m throwing the whole thing together by myself. I can always use an extra set of hands.”“Well, I’m not a cook, but I can sure chop and stir.What time?”“Four-thirty? I’ll be back from the supermarket by then. Ash said she’d come about five to help, too. Everybody else will be coming about seven. We’ll keep going till the food and alcohol give out.”“Great,” I said. “And the green dress will be okay?”“It better be. I’m giving this party so you can wear the damn thing.”I put a call through to Lance. I didn’t like initiating the contact with him, but I had to hear his version of the situation with Hugh Case. As soon as he was on the line, I told him what I’d heard. The silence was weighty. “Lance?”“I’m here,” he said. He sighed heavily. “Jesus, I don’t know how to deal with this. What the hell is going on? I heard rumors back then she thought I had something to do with his death. It’s not true. It’s completely untrue, but I don’t have a way of proving it. Why would I do that? What could I possibly gain by killing him?”“Wasn’t he leaving the company?”“Absolutely not. He talked about quitting. He said he wanted to start a company of his own. He even gave notice, but hell, Dad called him in and they had a long talk. Dad offered to make him a vice-president. Gave him a big raise and he was happy as a clam.”“When was this?”“I don’t know. A couple of days before he died.”“Didn’t that strike you as peculiar?”“Sure it did. She swore he didn’t kill himself and I agreed. He wasn’t the depressive type and he’d just made a hell of a deal for himself. Somehow she got it in her head that I killed the man. I wouldn’t harm a soul. You gotta believe me. Somebody’s working very hard to get me put away.”“Speaking of which, have you heard anything from California Fidelity?”His tone changed. “Yeah, yesterday. They’re turning everything over to the cops.”I could feel my stomach clench. “Really? Do they have enough to make a case?”“I don’t know. I hope not. Look, I need to talk to you privately and I can’t do it here. It’s important. Is there any way we can meet?”I told him I’d be at Olive’s later and we agreed to talk then. I wasn’t anxious to be seen in his company, but he seemed insistent, and at that point, I didn’t see how things could get worse. I wasn’t guilty of conspiracy and I was tired of acting like I was. Worry was sitting on my chest like a weight, leaden and oppressive. I had to do something to get my mind off things.I went out and bought a pair of high heels, anxiety translating into excitement as the day progressed. Being isolated that week had made me aware that I do have a few social impulses-buried deep, perhaps, under layers of caution, but part of me nevertheless. This was like dress-up time with the big kids, and I was looking forward to it. I’d begun to feel very charitable about Olive, whose life-style only yesterday had seemed superficial and self-indulgent. Who was I to judge? It was none of my business how she made her peace with the world. She’d fashioned a life out of tennis and shopping, but she managed to do occasional charity work, which was more than I could claim. She was right about one thing: the harm in the world is done by those who feel disenfranchised and abused. Contented people (as a rule) don’t kite checks, rob banks, or kill their fellow citizens.I thought about going to the gym, but decided to bag that idea. I hadn’t done a workout since Tuesday, but I just didn’t give a damn. I puttered and napped through the middle of the day.At 3:00 I took a long bubble bath... well, I used dishwashing liquid, but it did foam right up. I washed my hair and combed it for a change. I did some stuff to my face that passed for makeup in my book, and then wiggled into underwear and panty hose. The dress was grand, and it fit like a charm, rustling the same way Olive’s had the night before. I’d never had a role model for this female stuff. After my parents’ death when I was five, I’d been raised by a maiden aunt, no expert herself at things feminine. I’d spent the days of my childhood with cap guns and books, learning self-sufficiency, which loomed large with her. By the time I reached junior high I was a complete misfit, and by high school I’d thrown in my lot with some bad-ass boys who cussed and smoked dope, two things I mastered at an early age. In spite of the fact that I’m a social oaf, my aunt instilled a solid set of values, which prevailed in the end. By the time I graduated, I’d straightened up my act and now I’m a model citizen, give or take a civil code or two. At heart, I’ve always been a prissy little moralist. Private investigation is just my way of acting out.By 4:30, I was standing on the Kohlers’ doorstep, listening to the door chime echo through the house. It didn’t look as if anyone was there. There was mail jammed in the box, the newspaper and a brown paper-wrapped parcel on the mat. I peered into one of the long glass panels on either side of the front door. The foyer was dark and no lights were showing at the rear of the house. Olive probably wasn’t home from the supermarket yet. The cat appeared from around the side of the house with her long white coat and flat face. Somehow she seemed like a girl to me, but what do I know? I said some cat-type things. She appeared unimpressed.I heard a car horn toot. The electronic gate was rolled back from the driveway and a white Mercedes 380 SL pulled in. Olive waved and I moved toward the parking pad. She got out of the car and moved around to the rear, looking very classy in her white fur coat.“Sorry I’m late. Have you been here long?”“Five minutes.”She opened the trunk and picked up one grocery bag, then struggled to lift a second.“Here, let me help with that.”“Oh, thanks. Terry should be right behind me with the liquor.”I took the bag, snagging up another one while I was at it. There were two more in the trunk and another two bags visible in the front seat. “God, how many people did you invite?”“Just forty or so. It should be fun. Let’s get these in and we’ll have Terry bring the rest. We’ve got a ton of work to do.”She moved toward the front door while I brought up the rear. There was a crunch of tires on gravel and Terry pulled into the drive in a silver-gray Mercedes sedan. Must be nice, I thought. The gate rolled shut. I waited while Olive emptied the mailbox and shoved the stack of envelopes in the top of her grocery bag. She picked up the newspaper and tucked that in, too, then grabbed the parcel.“You need help? I can take something else.”“I got it.” She laid the parcel across the bag, securing it with her chin while she fumbled for her house key.The cat was sauntering toward the driveway, plumed tail aloft. I heard the clink of liquor bottles as Terry set his bags down on the concrete. He began to coil up a garden hose the yardman had left on the walk.“Break your neck on this thing,” he said. Olive got the door open and gave it a push. The telephone started to ring. I glanced back as she tossed the parcel toward the hall table.What happened next was too swift to absorb. There was a flash of light, a great burst that filled my visual field like a sun, followed by a huge cloud of white smoke. Shrapnel shot from a central point, spraying outward with a deadly velocity. A fireball seemed to curl across the threshold like a wall of water with a barrier removed, washing flames into the grass. Every blade of green in its path turned black. At the same time, I was lifted by a shattering low-frequency boom that hurtled me capriciously across the yard. I found myself sitting upright against a tree trunk like a rag doll, shoes gone, toes pointing straight up. I saw Olive fly past me as if she’d been yanked, tumbling in a high comic arc that carried her to the hedge and dropped her in a heap. My vision shimmered and cleared, a light show of the retina, accompanied by the breathless thumping of my heart. My brain, mute with wonder, failed to compute anything but the smell of black powder, pungent and harsh.The explosion had deafened me, but I felt neither fear nor surprise. Emotions are dependent on comprehension, and while I registered the event, nothing made any sense. Had I died in that moment, I would not have felt the slightest shred of regret, and I understood how liberating sudden death must be. This was pure sensation with no judgment attached.The front wall of the house was gone and a crater appeared where the hall table had been. The foyer was open to the air, surrounded by coronas of charred wood and plaster, burning merrily. Large flakes of pale blue and pale brown floated down like snow. Grocery items littered the entire yard, smelling of pickles, cocktail onions, and Scotch. I had taken in both sight and sound, but the apparatus of evaluation hadn’t caught up with me yet. I had no idea what had happened. I couldn’t remember what had transpired only moments before, or how this might relate to past events. Here we were in this new configuration, but how had it come to pass?From the change in light, I guessed that my eyebrows and lashes must be gone and I was conscious of singed hair and flash burns. I put a hand up, amazed to find my limbs still functioning. I was bleeding from the nose, bleeding from both ears, where the pain was now excruciating. To my left, I could see Terry’s mouth working, but no words were coming out. Something had struck him a glancing blow and blood poured down his face. He appeared to be in pain, but the movie was silent, sound reel flapping ineffectually. I turned to see where Olive was.For one confused moment, I thought I saw a pile of torn foxes, their bloodied pelts confirming what she’d said the day before. It is true, I thought, these animals in the wild get ripped to shreds every day. The harsh splattering of red against the soft white fur seemed obscene and out of place. And then, of course, I understood what I was looking at. The blast had opened her body, exposing tangles of bloody flesh, yellow fat, and jagged bone along her backside. I closed my eyes. By then, the smell of black powder was overlaid with the scent of woodsmoke and cooked flesh. Carefully I pondered the current state of affairs.Olive had to be dead, but Terry seemed okay, and I thought perhaps at some point he would come and help me up. No hurry, I thought. I’m comfy for now. The tree trunk provided back support, which helped, as I was tired. Idly, I wondered where my shoes had gone. I sensed movement, and when I opened my eyes again, confused faces were peering into mine. I couldn’t think what to say. I’d already forgotten what was going on, except that I was cold.Time must have passed. Men in yellow slickers pointed hoses at the house, swords of water cutting through the flames. Worried people crouched in front of me and worked their mouths some more. It was funny.They didn’t seem to realize they weren’t saying anything. So solemn, so animated, and so intent. Lips and teeth moving to such purpose with no visible effect. And then I was on my back, looking up into tree branches that wobbled through my visual field as I was borne away. I closed my eyes again, wishing that the reeling of the world would stop before I got sick. In spite of the fire, I was shivering.
