---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "F Is for Fugitive - index_split_004.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - F Is for Fugitive"
tags: ["ann", "said", "room", "bed", "mother", "right", "get", "could", "eye", "back", "want", "ori", "like", "well", "go", "see", "white", "kinsey", "passed", "bailey", "got", "hand", "take", "think", "two"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/FIsforFugitive-indexsplit004html

---


Unknown
Chapter 3The office was small, the registration desk blocking off access to what I surmised were the Fowlers’ personal quarters in the rear. My crossing the threshold had triggered a soft bell.“Be right out,” someone called. It sounded like Ann.I moved to the counter and peered to my right. Through an open door, I caught a glimpse of a hospital bed. There was the murmur of voices, but I couldn’t see a soul. I heard the muffled flushing of a toilet, pipes clanking noisily. The air was soon scented with the artificial bouquet of room spray, impossibly sweet. Nothing in nature has ever smelled like that.Several minutes passed. There was no seating available, so I stood where I was, turning to survey the narrow room. The carpeting was harvest gold, the walls paneled in knotty pine. A painting of autumn birches with fiery orange and yellow leaves hung above a maple coffee table on which a rack of pamphlets promoted points of interest and local businesses. I leafed through the display, picking up a brochure for the Eucalyptus Mineral Hot Springs, which I’d passed on the road coming in. The advertisement was for mud baths, hot tubs, and rooms at “reasonable” rates, whatever that meant.“Jean Timberlake worked there in the afternoons after school,” Ann said behind me. She was standing in the doorway, wearing navy slacks and a white silk shirt. She seemed more relaxed than she had in her father’s company. She’d had her hair done and it fell in loose waves to her shoulders, steering the eye away from the slightly recessed chin.I put the pamphlet back. “Doing what?” I asked.“Maid service, part-time. She worked for us, too, a couple of days a week.”“Did you know her well?”“Well enough,” she said. “She and Bailey started dating when he was twenty. She was a freshman in high school.” Ann’s eyes were mild brown, her manner detached.“A little young for him, wasn’t she?”Her smile was brief. “Fourteen.” Any other comment was curtailed by a voice from the other room.“Ann, is someone out there? You said you’d be right back. What’s happening?”“You’ll want to meet Mother,” Ann murmured in a way that generated doubts. She lifted a hinged section of the counter and I passed through. “How’s your father doing?”“Not good. Yesterday was hard on him. He was up for a while this morning, but he’s easily fatigued and I suggested he go back to bed.”“You’ve really got your hands full.” She flashed me a pained smile. “I’ve had to take a leave of absence.”“What sort of work?”“I’m a guidance counselor at the high school. Who knows when I’ll get back.”I let her lead the way into the living room, where Mrs. Fowler was now propped up in the full-sized hospital bed. She was gray-haired and heavy, her dark eyes magnified by thick glasses in heavy plastic frames. She was wearing a white cotton hospital gown that tied down the back. The neck was plain, with SAN LUIS OBISPO COUNTY HOSPITAL inked in block letters along the rim. It struck me as curious that she’d affect such garb when she could have worn a bed jacket or a gown and robe of her own. Illness as theater, perhaps. Her legs lay on top of the bedclothes like haunches of meat not yet trimmed of fat. Her pudgy feet were bare, and her toes were mottled gray.I crossed to the bed, holding my hand toward hers. “Hi, how are you? I’m Kinsey Millhone,” I said. We shook hands, if that’s what you’d call it. Her fingers were as cold and rubbery as cooked rigatoni. “Your husband mentioned you weren’t feeling well,” I went on.She put her handkerchief to her mouth and promptly burst into tears. “Oh, Kenny, I’m sorry. I can’t help myself. I’m just all turned around with Bailey showing up. We thought he was dead and here he comes again. I’ve been sick for years, but this has just made it worse.”“I can understand your distress. It’s Kinsey,” I said.“It’s what?”“My first name is Kinsey, my mother’s maiden name. I thought you said ‘Kenny’ and I wasn’t sure you heard it right.”“Oh Lord. I’m so sorry. My hearing’s nearly gone and I can’t brag about my eyes. Ann, honey, fetch a chair. I can’t think where your manners went.” She reached for a Kleenex and honked into it.“This is fine,” I said. “I’ve just driven up from Santa Teresa, so it feels good to be on my feet.”“Kinsey’s the investigator Pop hired yesterday. ““I know that,” Mrs. Fowler said. She began to fuss with her cotton cover, plucking it this way and that, made restless by topics that didn’t pertain to her. “I hoped to get myself all cleaned up, but Ann said she had errands. I hate to interfere with her any more than I have to, but there’s just things I can’t do with my arthritis so bad. Now, look at me. I’m a mess. I’m Ori, short for Oribelle. You must think I’m a sight.”“Not at all. You look fine.” I tell lies all the time. One more couldn’t hurt.“I’m diabetic,” she said, as though I’d asked. “Have been all my life, and what a toll it’s took. I got tingling and numbness in my extremities, kidney problems, bad feet, and now I’ve developed arthritis on top of that.” She held a hand out for my inspection. I expected knuckles as swollen as a prizefighter’s, but they looked fine to me.“I’m sorry to hear that. It must be rough.”“Well, I’ve made up my mind I will not complain,” she said. “If it’s anything I despise, it’s people who can’t accept their lot.”Ann said, “Mother, you mentioned tea a little while ago. How about you, Kinsey? Will you have a cup?”“I’m all right for now. Thanks.”“None for me, hon,” Ori said. “My taste for it passed, but you go ahead and fix some for yourself.”“I’ll put the water on.”Ann excused herself and left the room. I stood there wishing I could do the same. What I could see of the apartment looked much like the office: gold high-low carpeting, Early American furniture, probably from Montgomery Ward. A painting of Jesus hung on the wall at the foot of the bed. He had his palms open, eyes lifted toward heaven-pained, no doubt, by Ori’s home decorating taste. She caught my eye.“Bailey gave me that pitcher. It’s just the kind of boy he was.”“It’s very nice,” I replied, then quizzed her while I could. “How’d he get mixed up in a murder charge?”“Well, it wasn’t his fault. He fell in with bad company. He didn’t do good in high school and after he got out, he couldn’t find him a job. And then he ran into Tap Granger. I detested that no-account the minute I laid eyes on him, the two of ’em running around till all hours, getting into trouble. Royce was having fits.”“Bailey was dating Jean Timberlake by then?”“I guess that’s right,” she said, apparently hazy on the details after so much time had passed. “She was a sweet girl, despite what everybody said about that mother of hers.”The telephone rang and she reached over to the bed table to pick it up. “Motel,” she said. “Unh-hunh, that’s right. This month or next? Just a minute, I’ll check.” She pulled the reservation book closer, removing a pencil from between the pages. I watched her flip forward into March, peering closely at the print. Her tone, as she conducted business, was completely matter-of-fact. Gone was the suggestion of infirmity that marked her ordinary speech. She licked the pencil point and made a note, discussing king-sized beds versus queen.I took the opportunity to go in search of Ann. A doorway on the far wall led out into a hallway, with rooms opening off the central corridor in either direction. On the right, there was a staircase, leading to the floor above. I could hear water being run and then the taint tap of the teakettle on the burner in the kitchen to my left. It was hard to get a fix on the overall floor plan and I had to guess the apartment had been patched together from a number of motel rooms with the intervening walls punched out. The resulting town house was spacious, but jerry-built, with the traffic patterns of a maze. I peeked into the room across the hall. Dining room with a bath attached. There was access to the kitchen through what must have been an alcove for hanging clothes. I paused in the doorway. Ann was setting cups and saucers on an industrial-sized aluminum serving tray.“Need any help?”She shook her head. “Look around if you like. Daddy built the place himself when he and Mother first got married.”“Nice,” I said.“Well, it’s not anymore, but it was perfect for them. Has she given you a key yet? You might want to take your bags up. I think she’s putting you in room twenty-two upstairs. It’s got an ocean view and a little kitchenette.”“Thanks. That’s great. I’ll take my bags up in a bit. I’m hoping to talk to the attorney this afternoon.”“I think Pop set up an appointment for you at one-forty-five. He’ll probably want to tag along if he’s feeling up to it. He tends to want to stage-manage. I hope that’s all right.”“Actually, it’s not. I’ll want to go alone. Yourparents seem defensive about Bailey, and I don’t want to have to cope with that when I’m trying to get a rundown on the case.”“Yes. All right. I can see your point. I’ll see if I can talk Pop out of it.”Water began to rumble in the bottom of the kettle. She took teabags from a red-and-white tin canister on the counter. The kitchen itself was old-fashioned. The linoleum was a pale gridwork of squares in beige and green, like an aerial view of hay and alfalfa fields. The gas stove was white with chrome trim, unused burners concealed by jointed panels that folded back. The sink was shallow, of white porcelain, supported by two stubby legs, the refrigerator small, round-shouldered, and yellowing with age, probably with a freezer compartment the size of a bread box.The teakettle began to whistle. Ann turned the burner off and poured boiling water in a white teapot. “What do you take?”“Plain is fine.”I followed her back into the living room, where Ori was struggling to get out of bed. She’d already swung her feet over the side, her gown hitching up to expose the crinkled white of her thighs.“Mother, what are you doing?”“I have to go sit on the pot again, and you were taking so long I didn’t think I could wait.”“Why didn’t you call? You know you’re not supposed to get up without help. Honestly!” Ann set the tray down on a wooden serving cart and moved over to the bed to give her mother a hand. Ori descended ponderously, her wide knees trembling visibly as they took her weight. The two proceeded awkwardly into the other room.“Why don’t I go ahead and get my things out of the car?”“Do that,” she called. “We won’t be long.”The breeze off the ocean was chilly, but the sun was out. I shaded my eyes for a moment, peering at the town, where pedestrian traffic was picking up as the noon hour approached. Two young mothers crossed the street at a languid pace, pushing strollers, while a dog pranced along behind them with a Frisbee in his mouth. This was not the tourist season, and the beach was sparsely populated. Empty playground equipment was rooted in the sand. The only sounds were the constant shushing of the surf and the high, thin whine of a small plane overhead.I retrieved my duffel and the typewriter, bumping my way back into the office. By the time I reached the living room, Ann was helping Ori into bed again. I paused, waiting for them to notice me.“I need my lunch,” Ori was saying querulously to Ann.“Fine, Mother. Let’s go ahead and do a test. We should have done it hours ago, anyway.”“I don’t want to fool with it! I don’t feel that good.”I could see Ann curbing her temper at the tone her mother used. She closed her eyes. “You’re under a lot of stress,” she said evenly. “Dr. Ortego wants you to be very careful till he sees you next.”“He didn’t tell me that.”“That’s because you didn’t talk to him.”“Well, I don’t like Mexicans.”“He’s not Mexican. He’s Spanish.”“I still can’t understand a word he says. Why can’t I have a real doctor who speaks English?”“I’ll be right with you, Kinsey,” Ann murmured, catching sight of me. “Let me just get Mother settled first.”“I can take my bags up if you tell me where they go.”There was a brief territorial dispute as the two of them argued about which room to put me in. In the meantime, Ann was taking out cotton balls, alcohol, and some sort of testing strip sealed in a paper packet. I looked on with discomfort, an unwilling witness as she swabbed her mother’s fingertip and pierced it with a lancet. I could feel myself going nearly cross-eyed with distaste. I moved over to the bookcase, feigning interest in the titles on the shelves. Lots of inspirational reading and condensed versions of Leon Uris books. I pulled out a volume at random and leafed through, blocking out the scene behind me.I waited a decent interval, tucked the book away, and then turned back casually. Ann had apparently read the test results from the digital display on a meter by the bed and was filling a syringe from a small vial of pale, milky liquid I presumed was insulin. I busied myself with a glass paperweight-a Nativity scene in a swirling cloud of snow. Baby Jesus was no bigger than a paper clip. God, I’m a sissy when it comes to shots.From the rustling sounds behind me, I surmised they were done. Ann broke the needle off the disposable syringe and tossed it in the trash/She tidied up the bed table and then we moved out to the desk so she could give me my room key. Ori was already calling out a request.
