---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "F Is for Fugitive - index_split_025.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - F Is for Fugitive"
tags: ["could", "said", "back", "right", "like", "would", "going", "get", "know", "jean", "shana", "think", "car", "door", "go", "come", "hand", "phone", "well", "head", "look", "around", "first", "must", "knew"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/FIsforFugitive-indexsplit025html

---


Unknown
Chapter 24I circled the car, which looked vaguely sinister on the path, like the hulking carcass of some inexplicable beast. All four tires were flat. Someone hadn’t wanted Shana to go anywhere. I would almost have been willing to bet she was dead, that she’d arrived for her rendezvous with Dunne and had somehow never left. I lifted my head. The woods were chilly, smelling of leaf mold, damp mosses, and sulfur. The dark was intense, the night sounds eradicated, as if my very presence were a warning to the cicadas and tree frogs whose songs had been stilled. I didn’t want to find her. I didn’t want to look. Every bone in me was aching with the certainty that her body was here somewhere.I could feel my stomach churn as I flashed the narrow beam from the penlight across the front seat of Shana’s car. Nothing. I checked the backseat. Empty. I stared at the trunk lid. I didn’t think my lock picks would work, so if the trunk was locked, I was going to have to go down to the office, break in, lift Shana’s car keys from the lost-and-found box, and come back. I pressed the catch and the trunk swung open. Empty. I let out the breath I’d been holding unconsciously. I left the lid up, not wanting to risk the noise I’d make slamming it shut. “Sanctuary” had to be somewhere close.I tried to picture the plot map for the spas in this area. I flashed the penlight across the close-growing shrubs, looking for a path. Foliage that appeared to be a vivid green by day now had the matte, washed-out look of construction paper. A set of packed dirt steps, shored up by railroad ties, descended through a gap in the bushes.I went down. A rustic wood arrow indicated that “Aerie” was just off to my left. I passed “Haven” and “Tip Top.” “Sanctuary” was the fourth hot tub from the summit. I remembered then that it was located at the end of a long, twisted path, with two smaller paths branching off it. The leaves underfoot were soggy and made scarcely any sound, but I noticed I was leaving marshy prints in my wake. When I reached “Sanctuary,” I played the penlight across the ground. There were three cigarette butts trampled among the leaves. I hunkered down, bending close. Camel unfiltered. Shana’s brand.The silence was undercut by the intermittent high whining of a siren out on the highway. An erratic breeze, as moist as the inside of an ice chest, rattled among the tree branches. With the strong odor from the mineral springs in the air, it was difficult to discern any other scent. I’ve been known to find bodies with my nose, but not in this case.The spa had a bi-fold insulated cover pulled over it with a plastic handhold along the rim. I hesitated for a moment and then lifted it. A dense sulfurous cloud wafted into my face. The water in the redwood tub was pitch black, as still as glass. Mist hovered on the surface. I could feel my mouth purse. I wasn’t going to put my hand in there, folks. I wasn’t going to plunge my arm in up to the elbow, feeling around to determine if Shana’s body was submerged in the depths. I experienced a nearly physical sensation of undulating hair, soft and feathery, at my fingertips. At the back of my mind, it did occur to me that if Shana’d been killed and then dumped in here, she’d be floating by now, buoyed by accumulating gases... sort of like a pool toy. I could feel my eyes cross. Sometimes I sicken myself with my own thoughts.At knee height, there was a wooden door that apparently opened onto the heater and pump works tucked away out of sight. I pulled the door open. The body had been jammed in feet first. She unfolded from the waist, her bloody head coming to rest against my foot, sightless eyes staring up at me. A sound came up in my throat like bile.“Don’t move!”I jumped, whipping around, a hand against my lurching heart.Elva Dunne was standing there, flashlight in her left hand.“Jesus, Elva. You scared the shit out of me,” I snapped.She glanced briefly at Shana, not nearly as startled by the sight as I had been. Belatedly, I noticed that she had a little. 22 semiautomatic pointed at my gut. Gun buffs are dismissive of a. 22, apparently convinced that a weapon doesn’t count unless it’s capable of blowing a fist-sized hole through a board. Unfortunately, Elva hadn’t heard about this and she looked as if she was ready to drill me a second belly button right above the first. Let a little. 22 slug rip around in your gut and see how good you feel. It’ll bounce oft” bone like a tiny bumper car, tearing up every organ in its path.“I got a phone call from some guy who said Bailey Fowler was up here,” she said. “Just stay where you are and don’t move or I’ll shoot.”I raised my hands like they do in the movies, thinking to reassure her. “Hey, no Bailey. It’s just me and I’m cool,” I said. I gestured at Shana’s body. “I hope you don’t think I did that.”“Bullshit. Of course you did. Why else would you be here?”I could hear the siren now in its winding approach on the road down below. Somebody must have called the cops as well. Mention Bailey’s name and you got service real quick. “Look, put the gun down. Honest to God, I saw Shana’s keys in the lost-and-found box this afternoon. I figured she must have been here at some point, so I thought I’d check it out.”“Where’s the weapon? What’d you do, hit her with a baseball bat?”“Elva, she’s been dead for days. She was probably killed Wednesday night. If I’d just done it, the blood would be bright red and, uh, you know... spurting.” I hate it when people can’t comprehend the elementary stuff.Elva’s gaze jumped around and she shifted nervously. Dr. Dunne had said she was a paranoid schizophrenic, but what does that mean? I thought all those people were tripping out on Thorazine these days, as placid as rocks. This woman was big, one of those ham-shouldered Nordic types. I already knew she was as weird as they come. If she’d whacked at me with a Wilson, what was she going to do with a gun in her hand? Two deputies, with flashlights, were zigzagging up the path from below. Things were not looking good.I let my eyes drift toward her pants, and lifted my eyebrows a bit. “Oh wow. I wouldn’t worry about it, but there’s a spider the size of a meatball crawling down your leg.”She had to look. How could she not?I kicked upward, my running shoe lifting the gun right out of her hand. I saw the. 22 do a high, tumbling somersault and disappear into the dark. I rammed into her, knocking her ass-over-teakettle right after it. She yelped as she tumbled backward, crashing down the hill.The first of the deputies had apparently reached the midpoint of the hill. I shoved my penlight in my pocket and ran like hell. I wasn’t sure where I was going, but I hoped to get there quick. I angled up through the trees, headed for the fire lane, figuring I could run for a while unimpeded. Shana’s Plymouth was blocking the overgrown lane, so even if they managed to get a sheriff’s car up here, they’d have trouble getting through. I was making too much noise to hear if anyone was behind me, but it seemed smarter to assume the cops were close on my heels. I quickened my pace, sailing over the trunk of a tree in my path.The fire lane began to climb steeply, dead-ending in a gate with a wire fence that stretched away on either side. I took a flying leap, put a hand on the gatepost and arched my back, catching my foot as I tried to clear the top. I smacked down with an “Oof!” rolled, and got up again, suppressing a moan. The fall had rammed the Davis right into my ribs. Much pain.I plugged on, heading upward. The hill leveled out in a rugged pasture dotted with scrub oak and manzanita. The moon wasn’t full, but there was enough of it to illuminate the choppy field through which I ran. I must have been a quarter of a mile from the road, in an area inaccessible to vehicles. I was desperately in need of rest. I looked over my shoulder. There was no sign of pursuit. I slowed to a jog and searched out a depression in the grass.I sank down, winded, blotting my sweaty brow on the sleeve of my turtleneck. Some winged creature swooped down close to me and then cruised away, temporarily mistaking me for something edible. I hate nature. I really do. Nature is composed entirely of sticks, dirt, fall-down places, biting and stinging things, and savageries too numerous to list. And I’m not the only one who feels this way. Man has been building cities since the year oughty-ought, just to get away from this stuff. Now we’re on our way to the moon and other barren spots where nothing grows and you can pick up a rock without having something jump out at you. The quicker we get there, the better, as far as I’m concerned.Time to move. I staggered to my feet again and began to trot, wishing I had a plan. I couldn’t go back to the motel-the sheriff’s department was going to be there in ten minutes flat-but without my car keys and some bucks, what was I going to do? It occurred to me I might have been better off hanging out with Elva until the deputies arrived, taking my chances with the law. Now/was a fugitive, and I didn’t like it much.A flash of Shana’s face popped into my head. She’d been bludgeoned to death, from the look of her, shoved into the narrow space under the hot tub until someone could dispose of her-if that was the intent. Maybe that’s what Elva had trudged up there in the dark to do. I couldn’t decide if I should believe her claim about the phone call. Had she killed Shana Timberlake? Killed her daughter seventeen years before that? Why the lag time? And why Ori Fowler? Given Elva as the killer, I couldn’t come up with a scenario in which Ori’s death made any sense. Could the phone call have been meant to trap me up there? As far as I knew, the only two people who were aware of where I’d be were Jack Clemson and Bert.I halted again. The ground was beginning to slant downward, and I found myself squinting through the dark at a sharp drop-off. Below, a gray ribbon of road curled along the base of the hill. I had no idea where it led, but if the cops were smart, they’d be calling for backup cars, which might be cruising by any minute, hoping to cut me off. I scrambled down the rocky incline as fast as I could, half-humping, half-sliding on my backside, preceded by a tiny landslide of loose stones and dirt. I could hear approaching sirens as I skidded the last few feet. I was panting from exhaustion, but I didn’t dare stop. I hightailed it across the road, reaching the far side just as the first black-and-white rounded the bend maybe six hundred yards away.I plunged into the brush, hugging the ground as I belly-crawled my way through the weeds. Once I was safely in the cover of the trees, I paused to reorient myself, rolling over on my back. Against the encroaching fog bank I could see the reflection of the vapor lights that lined Ocean Street. Floral Beach wasn’t far. Unfortunately, what lay between me and the town was the posted property belonging to the oil refinery. I studied the eight-foot chain-link fence. Strands of barbed wire were strung along the top. No crossing that. Big oil storage tanks loomed up on the far side, painted in pastel shades, like a series of cakes.I was still close enough to the road that I could hear the squawking of the sheriff’s cars in position along the berm. Lights raked the hillside.I hoped the suckers hadn’t brought dogs. That was all I’d need. I crawled to the base of the fence, clinging to it doggedly as I pushed on. In the dark, it served not only as a guide, but as a needed support. More warning signs. This was a hard hat area... and me with no hard hat. I was winded and sweating, my hands torn, nose beginning to run. The smell of the ocean was getting stronger and I took comfort from that.Abruptly, the fence took a hard cut left. What opened up in front of me was a dirt path strewn with trash, a lovers’ lane perhaps. I didn’t dare use my penlight. I was still in the hills above Floral Beach, but I was getting closer to the town. In less than a quarter of a mile, I found myself at the tag end of the lane that spilled into a cul-de-sac. Oh glory, now I knew where I was. This was the bluff above Jean Timberlake’s old apartment building. Once I reached the wooden stairway, I could climb down to the rear door of her place and hide. To my right, I spotted the glass-and-frame house where I’d knocked earlier. Lights were on inside.I skirted the house, groping my way along the property line, marked by waist-high shrubs. As I passed the kitchen window, I caught sight of the occupant looking straight out at me. I dropped, realizing belatedly that the guy must be standing at the kitchen sink. The window would be throwing his own reflection back at him, effectively blocking out the sight of me, I hoped. Cautiously I rose and peered closer. Dwight Shales.I blinked, debating with myself. Could 1 trust him? Was I safer up here with him or hiding in the abandoned building below? Oh hell, this was no time to be shy. I needed help.I doubled back to the front porch and rang the bell. I kept an eye on the street, worried a patrol car would cruise into sight. At some point they were going to realize I’d slipped through the net. Given the impenetrability of the oil company property, this was probably the logical place to end up. The porch light came on. The front door opened. I turned to look at him. “Kinsey, my God. What happened to you?”“Hello, Dwight. Can I come in?” He held the door open, stepping back. “Are you in some kind of trouble?”“That would cover it,” I said. My explanation was worthy of a box top, twenty-five words or less, tendered while I followed him through the foyer-all raw woods and modern art. We went down a step into the living room, which was dead ahead: two stories of glass looking out toward the view. The roof of Jean’s apartment building wasn’t visible, but I could see the lights of Floral Beach stretching almost as far as the big hotel on the hillside half a mile away.“Let me get you a drink,” he said. “Thanks. Do you mind if I clean up?” He nodded to his left. “Straight down the hall.”I found the bathroom and ran some water, scrubbing my hands and face. I blotted my face dry, staring at myself in the bathroom mirror. I had a big scratch on my cheek. My hair was matted with dirt. I found a comb in his medicine cabinet and ran it through my mop. I peed, brushed myself off, washed my hands and face again, and returned to the living room where Dwight handed me some brandy in a softball-sized snifter.I took it neat and he poured me a second.“Thanks,” I said. I could feel the liquor defining my insides as it eased through. I had to breathe with my mouth open for a bit. “Whew! Great.”“Sit down. You look beat.”“I am,” I said. I glanced anxiously toward the front door. “Are we visible from the street?”The narrow panels on either side of the front door were frosted glass. It was the exposed living room that bothered me. I felt as if I were onstage. He crossed the room and closed the drapes. The room was suddenly much cozier and I relaxed a bit.He sat down in the chair across from me. “Tell me again.”I went back through the story, filling in the details. “I probably should have just waited for the cops.”“You want to go ahead and call them and turn yourself in? The phone’s right there.”“Not yet,” I said. “That’s what I kept telling Bailey, but now I know how he felt. They’d just keep me up all night, hounding me with questions I don’t have the answers for.”“What are you going to do?”“Don’t know. Get my head together and see if I can figure this out. You know, I was up here earlier and knocked on the door, but you weren’t home. I wanted to ask if anybody up here ever saw Jean using the stairs.”“The stairs?”“Up from the Timberlakes’ apartment. It was right down there.” I found myself pointing to the floor to indicate the base of the bluff.“Oh, that’s right. I’d forgotten about that. Talk about small towns. I guess none of us are that far from anybody else.”“That’s for sure,” I said. At the back of my mind, uneasiness was beginning to stir. Something about his response wasn’t quite ringing true. Maybe it was his manner, which was suddenly too studiously casual to be believable. Pretending to be “normal” is a lot harder than you’d think. Did it mean anything, his having lived this close? “You forgot Jean Timberlake lived thirty feet away?”“No big deal,” he said. “I think they only lived there a few months before she died.” He set his brandy snifter on the coffee table. “You hungry? I’d be happy to fix you something to eat.”I shook my head, easing him back toward the subject that interested me. “I realized this afternoon that the back door of the Timberlake apartment opened right onto the stairs. I figure she could easily have used the road up here as a rendezvous point for the guys she screwed around with. You never saw her up here?”He considered the possibility, searching his memory. “No, I don’t believe so. Is it that important?”“Well, it could be. If somebody saw Jean, they might have also seen the guy she was having the affair with.”“Come to think of it, I did see cars up here at night on occasion. I guess it never occurred to me it might be somebody waiting to pick her up.”I love bad liars. They work so hard at it and the effort is so transparent. I happen to lie well myself, but only after years of practice. Even then, I can’t pull it off every time. This guy didn’t even come close. I sat and looked at him, giving him time to reconsider his position.He frowned with concern. “By the way, what’s the story on Ann’s mother? Mrs. Emma called about an hour ago and told me Bailey switched the medication. I couldn’t believe it...”“Excuse me, could we get back to Jean Timberlake first?”“Oh, sorry. I thought we were done, and I’ve been awfully worried about Ann. It’s unbelievable what she’s been through. Anyway, go ahead.”“Were you fucking Jean Timberlake yourself?”The word was just right, crude and to the point. He let out a little laugh of disbelief, like he must not have heard me right. “What?”“Come on. ‘Fess up. Just tell me the truth. I’d really like to know.”He laughed again, shaking his head as though to clear it. “My God, Kinsey. I’m a high school principal.”“I know what you are, Dwight. I’m asking you what you did.”He stared at me, apparently annoyed that I’d persist. “This is ridiculous. The girl was seventeen.”I said nothing. I returned a look of such skepticism that his smile began to fade. He got up and poured himself another drink. He held the brandy bottle toward me, mutely asking me if I wanted more. I shook my head.He sat down again. “I think we should move on to something more productive. I’m willing to help, but I’m not going to play any games with you.” He was all business now. The meeting was called to order and we were going to get serious. No more silly bullshit. “I’d have to be crazy to get involved with a student,” he went on. “Jesus. What an idea.” He rolled his shoulders. I could hear the joint pop. I knew he wanted to convince me, but the words carried no conviction.I dropped my gaze to the tabletop, pushing my empty snifter an inch. “We’re all capable of astonishing ourselves when it comes to sex.”He was silent.I focused on him intently.He recrossed his legs. Now it was him, not looking at me.“Dwight?”He said, “I thought I was in love with her.”Careful, I thought. Take care. The moment is fragile and his trust is tenuous. “It must have been a tough time. Karen was diagnosed with MS right about then, wasn’t she?”He set the glass down again and his gaze met mine. “You have a good memory.” I kept silent.He finally took up the narrative thread. “She was actually in the process of being evaluated, but I think we knew. It’s staggering how something like that affects you. She was bitter at first. Withdrawn. In the end, she was better about it than I was. God, I couldn’t believe it was happening, and then I turned around and Jean was there. Young, lusty, outrageous.”He was quiet for a moment. I said nothing, letting him tell it his way. He didn’t need any prompting from me. This was a story he knew by heart.“I didn’t think Karen would survive anyway because the first round was acute. She seemed to go downhill overnight. Hell, I didn’t think she’d live till spring. In a situation like that, your mind leaps ahead. You get into survival mode. I remember thinking, ‘Hey, I can make it. The marriage isn’t that great, anyway.’ I was only what, thirty-nine? Forty? I had a lot of years ahead of me. I figured I’d marry again. Why not? We weren’t perfect, the two of us. I’m not sure we were even very well suited to each other. The MS changed all that. When she died, I was more in love with her than I’d ever been.” “And Jean?”“Ah, but Jean. Early on”-he paused to shake his head-“I was crazy. I must have been. If that relationship had ever become public knowledge... well, it would have ruined my lite. Karens, too... what was left of it.”“Was the baby yours?”“I don’t know. Probably. I wish I could say no, but what could I do? I only found out about it after Jean died. I can’t imagine what the consequences would have been... you know... if the pregnancy had come to light.”“Yeah, unlawful sexual intercourse being what it is.”“Oh God, don’t say that. Even now the phrase is enough to make me sick.”“You kill her?”“No. I swear. I was capable of a lot of crazi-ness back then, but not that.”I watched him, sensing that he was telling the truth. This wasn’t a killer I was listening to. He might have been desperate or despairing. He might have realized after the fact how perilous his situation was, but I didn’t hear the kind of rationalization killers get into. “Who else knew about the pregnancy?”“I don’t know. What difference would it make?”“I’m not sure. You can’t really be certain the baby was yours. Maybe there was somebody else.”“Bailey knew about it.”“Aside from him. Couldn’t someone else have heard?”“Well, sure, but so what? I know she showed up at the school very upset and went straight to the counselor’s office.”“I thought the guidance counselors only handled academic matters-college prep requirements and stuff like that.”“There were exceptions. Sometimes we had to screen personal problems and refer kids out for professional counseling.”“What would have been done then, if Jean had asked for help?’“We’d have done what we could. San Luis has social agencies set up for things like that.”“Jean never talked to you herself?”He shook his head. “I wish she had. Maybe I could have done something for her, I don’t know. She had her crazy side. We’re not talking about a girl who’d agree to an abortion. She never would have given that baby up and she wouldn’t have kept quiet. She’d have insisted on marriage, regardless of the price. I have to tell you-I know it sounds horrible, but I have to say this--I was relieved when she died. Enormously. When I understood the risk I’d taken... when I saw what I had at stake. It was a gift. I cleaned up my act right then. I never screwed around on Karen again.”“I believe you,” I said. But what was bothering me? I could feel an idea churning, but I couldn’t quite sense what it was.Dwight was going on. “It was a bit of a rude awakening when I heard the stories going around after she’d been killed. I was naive enough to think we had something special between us, but that turned out not to be the case.”I kept picking at it like a bone. “So if she didn’t turn to you for help, she could have turned to somebody else.”“Well, yes, but she didn’t have much time for that, as I understand. She had the test done in Lompoc and got the results that afternoon. By midnight she was dead.”“How long does it take to make a phone call?” I said. “She had hours. She could have called half the guys in Floral Beach and some in San Luis, too. Suppose it was someone else? Suppose you were just a cover for another relationship? There must have been other guys with just as much to lose.”“I’m sure it’s possible,” he said, but he sounded dubious.The phone rang, a harsh sound in the stillness of the big house. Dwight leaned back, reaching over to pick up the receiver from the end table by the couch. “Hello? Oh, hi.”His face had brightened with recognition and I saw his eyes stray to my face as the person on the other end of the line went on. He was making “unh-hunh” noises while someone rattled on. “No, no, no. Don’t worry. Hang on. She’s right here.” He held the phone out and I took it. “It’s Ann,” he said.“Hi, Ann. What’s happening?”Her voice was cold and she was clearly upset. “Well. At long last. Where the hell have you been? I’ve been looking for you for hours.”I found myself squinting at the phone, trying to determine the reason for the tone she had taken.What was wrong with her? “Is there a deputy with you?” I asked.“I think we could say that.”“You want to wait and call me back when he goes?”“No, I don’t, dear. Here’s what I want. I want you to get your ass down here right away! Daddy checked himself out of the hospital and he’s been bugging me ever since. WHERE HAVE YOU BEEN?” she shrieked. “Do you have any idea... do you have any IDEA what’s been going on? DO YOU? Goddamn it!...”I held the phone away from my ear. She was really building up a head of steam here. “Ann, stop that. Calm down. It’s too complicated to go into right now.”“Don’t give me that. Don’t you dare ever, ever give me that.”“Don’t give you what? What are you so upset about?”“You know perfectly well,” she snapped. “What are you doing over there? You listen to me, Kin-sey. And you listen good...”I started to interrupt, but she’d just put a palm across the mouthpiece, talking to someone in the background. The deputy? Oh hell, was she telling him where I was?I replaced the receiver in the cradle.Dwight was looking at me with perplexity. “You okay? What was that about?”“I have to go to San Luis Obispo,” I said carefully. It was a lie, of course, but it was the first thing that occurred to me. Ann had told them where I was. Within minutes this whole cul-de-sac would be blocked off, the neighborhood swarming with deputies. I had to get out of there, and I didn’t think it was wise to let him know where I was headed.“San Luis?” he said. “What for?”I moved toward the front door. “Don’t worry about it. I’ll be back in a bit.”“Don’t you need a car?”“I’ll get one.”I closed the door behind me, leaped off the porch, and ran.
