---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "F Is for Fugitive - index_split_003.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - F Is for Fugitive"
tags: ["time", "henry", "year", "back", "like", "eye", "got", "beach", "one", "could", "face", "never", "good", "take", "might", "probably", "something", "kitchen", "floral", "get", "day", "week", "still", "went", "two"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/FIsforFugitive-indexsplit003html

---


Unknown
Chapter 2I let myself in through the gate and circled the new construction to Henry’s patio in the rear. He was standing near the back fence, chatting with our next-door neighbor while he hosed down the flagstones. He didn’t miss a beat, but his gaze flicked over to the sight of me, and a slight smile crossed his face. I never think of him as elderly, though he’d celebrated his eighty-second birthday on Valentine’s Day, the week before. He’s tall and lean, with a narrow face, and blue eyes the color of gas jets. He’s got a shock of soft white hair that he wears brushed to one side, good teeth (all his), a year-round tan. His overriding intelligence is tempered with warmth, and his curiosity hasn’t diminished a whit with age. Until his retirement, he worked as a commercial baker. He still can’t resist making breads and sweet rolls, cookies and cakes, which he trades to merchants in the area for goods and services. His current passion is designing crossword puzzles for those little paperback publications you can pick up in a supermarket checkout line. He also clips coupons, priding himself on all the money he saves. At Thanksgiving, for instance, he managed to buy a twenty-three-pound turkey for only seven bucks. Then, of course, he had to invite fifteen people in to help him polish it off. If I had to find fault with him, I suppose I’d have to cite his gullibility, and a tendency to be passive when he ought to take a stand and fight. In some ways, I see myself as his protector, a notion that might amuse him, as he probably sees himself as mine.I still wasn’t used to living under the same roof with him. My stay was temporary, just until my apartment was finished, perhaps another month. Peripheral damage to his place had been speedily repaired, except for the sun porch, which was demolished along with the garage. I had my own key to the house and I came and went as I pleased, but there were times when the emotional claustrophobia got to me. I like Henry. A lot. There couldn’t be anyone better-natured than he, but I’ve been on my own for eight years plus, and I’m not used to having anyone at such close range. It was making me edgy, as if he might have some expectation of me that I could never meet. Perversely, I found myself feeling guilty for my own uneasiness.When I let myself in the back door, I could smell something cooking: onions, garlic, tomatoes, probably a chicken dish. A dome of freshly baked bread was resting on a metal rack. The kitchen table was set for two. Henry’d had a girlfriend briefly, who’d redecorated his kitchen. At the time, she’d been hoping to rearrange his life savings-twenty thousand in cash, which she thought might look better in her own bank account. She was thwarted, thanks to me, and all that remained of her, at this point, were the kitchen curtains, green print cotton tied back with green bows. Henry was currently using the color-coordinated table napkins for handkerchiefs. We never spoke of Lila, but I sometimes wondered if he didn’t secretly resent my intrusion into his romance. Sometimes being fooled by love is worth the price. At least you know you’re alive and capable of feeling, even if all you end up with is chest pain.I moved through the hallway to the small back bedroom I was currently calling home. Just walking in the door had made me feel restless and I thought ahead to the trip to Floral Beach with relief. Outside, I heard the squawk of the faucet being turned off and I could picture Henry neatly recoiling the hose. The screen door banged, and in a moment I heard the creak of his rocker, the rustle of the newspaper as he folded it over to the sports section, which he always read first.There was a small pile of clean clothes at the foot of the bed. I crossed to the chest of drawers and stared at myself in the mirror. I looked cranky, no doubt about it. My hair is dark and I cut it myself with a pair of nail scissors every six weeks. The effect is just about what you’d expect-ragged, inexpert. Recently, someone told me it looked like a dog’s rear end. I ran my hands through my mop, but it didn’t do much good. My brow was furrowed in a little knot of discontent, which I smoothed with one finger. Hazel eyes, dark lashes. My nose blows real good and it’s remarkably straight, considering it’s been broken twice. Like a chimp, I bared my teeth, satisfied to see them (more or less) lined up right. I don’t wear makeup. I’d probably look better if I did something with my eyes-mascara, eyebrow pencil, eye shadow in two shades-but then I’d be forever fooling around with the stuff, which seems like a waste of time. I was raised, for the most part, by a maiden aunt whose notion of beauty care was an occasional swipe of cold cream underneath her eyes. I was never taught to be girlish, so here I am, at thirty-two, stuck with a face unadorned by cosmetic subterfuge. As it is, we could not call mine a beautiful puss, but it does the job well enough, distinguishing the front of my head from the back. Which was neither here nor there, as my appearance was not the source of my disquiet. So what was my problem? I went back to the kitchen and paused in the doorway. Henry had poured himself a drink as he does every night; Black Jack on the rocks. He glanced at me idly and then did a proper double take, fixing me with a look. “What’s wrong?”“I got a job today up in Floral Beach. I’ll probably be gone a week to ten days.”“Oh. Is that all? That’s good. You need a change.” He turned back to the paper, leafing through the section on local news.I stood there and stared at the back of his head. A painting by Whistler came immediately to mind. In a flash, I understood what was going on. “Henry, are you mothering me?”“What makes you say that?”“Being here feels weird.”“In what way?”“I don’t know. Dinner on the table, stuff like that.”“I like to eat. Sometimes I eat two, three times a day,” he said placidly. He found the crossword puzzle at the bottom of the funnies and reached for a ballpoint pen. He wasn’t giving this nearly the attention it deserved.“You swore you wouldn’t fuss over me if I moved in.”“I don’t fuss.”“You do fuss.”“You’re the one fussing. I haven’t said a word.”“What about the laundry? You’ve got clothes folded up at the foot of my bed.”“Throw ’em on the floor if you don’t like ’em there.”“Come on, Henry. That’s not the point. I said I’d do my own laundry and you agreed.”Henry shrugged. “Hey, so I’m a liar. What can I say?”“Would you quit? I don’t need a mother.”“You need a keeper. I’ve said so for months.You don’t have a clue how to take care of yourself.You eat junk. Get beat up. Place gets blown to bits. I told you to get a dog, but you refuse. So now you got me, and if you ask me, it serves you right.”How irksome. I felt like one of those ducklings inexplicably bonded to a mother cat. My parents had been killed in a car wreck when I was five. In the absence of real family, I’d simply done without. Now, apparently, old dependencies had surfaced. I knew what that meant. This man was eighty-two. Who knew how long he’d live? Just about the time I let myself get attached to him, he’d drop dead. Ha, ha, the joke’s on you, again.“I don’t want a parent. I want you as a friend.”“I am a friend.”“Well, then, cut the nonsense. It’s making me nuts.”Henry’s smile was benign as he checked his watch. “You’ve got time for a run before dinner if you quit mouthing off.”That stopped me. I’d really hoped to get a run in before dark. It was almost four-thirty, and a glance at the kitchen window showed I didn’t have long. I abandoned my complaints and changed into jogging sweats.The beach that day was odd. The passing storm clouds had stained the horizon a sepia shade. The mountains were a drab brown, the sky a poisonous-looking tincture of iodine. Maybe Los Angeles was burning to the ground, sending up this mirage of copper-colored smoke turning umber at the edge. I ran along the bike path that borders the sand.The Santa Teresa coastline actually runs east and west. On a map, it looks like the ragged terrain takes a sudden left turn, heading briefly out to sea before the currents force it back. The islands were visible, hovering offshore, the channel dotted with oil rigs that sparkled with light. It’s worrisome, but true, that the oil rigs have taken on an eerie beauty of their own, as natural to the eye now as orbiting satellites.By the time I made the turnaround a mile and a half down the path, twilight had descended and the streetlights were ablaze. It was getting cold and the air smelled of salt, the surf battering the beach. There were boats anchored beyond the breakers, the poor man’s yacht harbor. The traffic was a comfort, illuminating the grassy strip between the sidewalk and the bike path. I try to run every day, not from passion, but because it’s saved my life more than once. In addition to the jogging, I usually lift weights three times a week, but I’d had to discontinue that temporarily, due to injuries.By the time I got home, I was in a better mood. There’s no way to sustain anxiety or depression when you’re out of breath. Something in the sweat seems to bring cheer in its wake. We ate supper, chatting companionably, and then I went to my room and packed a bag for the trip. I hadn’t begun to think about the situation up in Floral Beach, but I took a minute to open a file folder, which I labeled with Bailey Fowler’s name. I sorted through the newspapers stacked up in the utility room, clipping the section that detailed his arrest.According to the article, he’d been out on parole on an armed-robbery conviction at the time his seventeen-year-old ex-sweetheart was found strangled to death. Residents of the resort town reported that Fowler, then twenty-three, had been involved in drugs off and on for years, and speculated that he’d killed the girl when he learned of her romantic entanglement with a friend of his. With the plea bargain, he’d been sentenced to six years in the state prison. He’d served less than a year at the Men’s Colony at San Luis Obispo when he engineered his escape. He left California, assuming the alias of Peter Lambert. After a number of miscellaneous sales jobs, he’d gone to work for a clothing manufacturer with outlets in Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and California. In 1979, the company had promoted him to western division manager. He was transferred to Los Angeles, where he’d been residing ever since. The newspaper indicated that his colleagues were stunned to learn he’d ever been in trouble. They described him as hardworking, competent, outgoing, articulate, active in church and community affairs.The black-and-white photograph of Bailey Fowler showed a man maybe forty years old, half-turned toward the camera, his face blank with disbelief. His features were strong, a refined version of his father’s, with the same pugnacious jaw-line. An inset showed the police photograph taken of him seventeen years before, when he was booked for the murder of Jean Timberlake. Since then, his hairline had receded slightly and there was a suggestion that he may have darkened the color, but then again that might have been a function of age or the quality of the photograph. He’d been a handsome kid, and he wasn’t bad looking now.Curious, I thought, that a man can reinvent himself. There was something enormously appealing in the idea of setting one persona aside and constructing a second to take its place. I wondered if serving out his sentence in prison would have had as laudatory an effect as being out in the world, getting on with his life. There was no mention of a family, so I had to guess he’d never married. Unless this new attorney of his was a legal wizard, he’d have to serve the remaining years of his original sentence, plus an additional sixteen months to two years on the felony escape charge. He could be forty-seven by the time he was released, years he probably wasn’t interested in giving up without a fight.The current paper had a follow-up article, which I also clipped. For the most part, it was a repetition of the first, except that a high school yearbook photo of the murdered girl was included along with his. She’d been a senior. Her dark hair was glossy and straight, cut to the shape of her face, parted in the middle and curving in softly at the nape of her neck. Her eyes were pale, lined with black, her mouth wide and sensual. There was the barest suggestion of a smile, and it gave her an air of knowing something the rest of us might not be aware of yet.I slipped the clippings in the folder, which I tucked into the outside pocket of my canvas duffel.I’d stop by the office and pick up my portable typewriter en route.At nine the next morning, I was on the road, heading up the pass that cuts through the San Rafael Mountains. As the two-lane highway crested, I glanced to my right, struck by the sweep of undulating hills that move northward, intersected by bare bluffs. The rugged terrain is tinted to a hazy blue-gray by the nature of the underlying rock. The land here has lifted, and now the ridges of shale and sandstone project in a visible spine called the Transverse Ranges. Geological experts have concluded that California, west of the San Andreas Fault, has moved north up the Pacific coast by about three hundred miles during the last thirty million years. The Pacific Plate is still grinding away at the continent, buckling the coastal regions in earthquake after earthquake. That we continue to go about our daily business without much thought for this process is either testimony to our fortitude or evidence of lunacy. Actually, the only quakes I’ve experienced have been minor temblors that rattle dishes on the shelf or set the coat hangers in the closet to tinkling merrily. The sensation is no more alarming than being shaken awake gently by someone too polite to call your name. People in San Francisco, Coalinga, and Los Angeles will have a different tale to tell, but in Santa Teresa (aside from the Big One in 1925) we’ve had mild, friendly earthquakes that do little more than slop some of the water out of our swimming pools.The road eased down into the valley, intersecting Highway 101 some ten miles beyond. At 10:35, I took the Floral Beach exit, heading west toward the ocean through grassy, rolling hills dotted with oaks. I could smell the Pacific long before I laid eyes on it. Screeching sea gulls heralded its appearance, but I was still surprised by the breadth of that flat line of blue. I hung a left onto the main street of Floral Beach, the ocean on my right. The motel was visible three blocks away, the only three-story structure on Ocean Street. I pulled into a fifteen-minute parking space outside the registration office, grabbed my duffel, and went in.
