---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "F Is for Fugitive - index_split_018.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - F Is for Fugitive"
tags: ["like", "said", "hand", "white", "back", "face", "see", "could", "racket", "dunne", "eye", "arm", "jean", "get", "would", "way", "line", "elva", "felt", "shirt", "full", "head", "still", "around", "took"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/FIsforFugitive-indexsplit018html

---


Unknown
Chapter 17Dr. Dunne emerged from the bathroom fully dressed, wearing kelly green slacks with a white belt, a pink and green plaid sports shirt, white loafers, pink socks. All he needed was a white sportcoat to constitute what’s known as a “full Cleveland,” very popular among middle-aged bon vivants in the Midwest. He had a full head of white hair, still damp, combed straight back. Tendrils were already curling up around his ears. His face was full, his complexion hot pink, eyes very blue under unruly white brows. He was probably six foot two, toting an extra fifty pounds’ worth of rich food and drink, which he carried in the front like six months’ worth of pregnancy. How come all the men in this town were out of shape?He stopped in his tracks when he caught sight of me. “Yes, ma’am,” he said, in response to some question I hadn’t asked him yet.I infused my tone with warmth, feigning graciousness. “Hi, Dr. Dunne. I’m Kinsey Millhone,” I said, extending my hand. He responded with a minimal squeeze, three fingers pressing mine.“Personnel’s down the hall, but we’re not hiring presently. The hotel won’t open for business until April first.”“I’m not looking for work. I need some information about a former patient of yours.”His eyes took on that doctor-privilege look. “And who would that be?”“Jean Timberlake.”His body language switched over to a code I couldn’t read. “Are you with the police?”I shook my head. “I’m a private detective, hired by-”“I can’t help you, then.”“Mind if I sit?”He stared at me blankly, accustomed to his pronouncements being taken as law. He probably never had to deal with pushy people like me. He was protected from the public by his receptionist, his lab tech, his nurse, his billing clerk, his answering service, his office manager, his wife-an army of women keeping Doctor safe and untouched. “I must not have made myself clear, Miss Millhone. We have nothing to discuss.”“Sorry to hear that,” I said equably. “I’m trying to find out who her father was.”“Who let you in here?”“The desk clerk just talked to your wife,” I said, which was true but not relevant.“Young lady, I’m going to have to ask you to leave. There’s no way in the world I’d give you information about the Timberlakes. I’ve been the personal physician to that family for years.”“I understand that,” I said. “I’m not asking you to breach confidentiality-”“You most certainly are!”“Dr. Dunne, I’m trying to get a line on a murder suspect. I know Jean was illegitimate. I’ve got a copy of the birth certificate, listing her father as unknown. I don’t see any reason to protect the man if you know who he was. If you don’t, just say so and save us both some time.”“This is a damn outrage, barging in on me like this! You have no right to pry into that poor girl’s past. Excuse me,” he said darkly, crossing to the door. “Elva!” he yelled. “El!!”I could hear someone thumping purposefully down the corridor. I put a business card on the edge of his desk. “I’m at the Ocean Street Motel if you decide to help.”I was halfway out the door when Mrs. Dunne appeared. She was still in tennis clothes, her pale cheeks flushed. I could see that she recognized me from my first visit to the place. My return wasn’t greeted with the delight I had hoped for. She was holding her racket like a hatchet, the wooden rim edgewise. I eased away, keeping an eye on her. I don’t usually feel that threatened by horsey women with big legs, but she had already stepped across the line into my psychological space. She moved forward a step, standing so close now I could smell her breath, no big treat.“I was hoping to get some help on a case, but I guess I was wrong.”“Call the police,” she said flatly to him.Without any warning, she lifted the racket like a samurai sword.I skipped back as the racket swopped down at me. “Whoa, lady! You better watch that,” I said.She struck out at me again, missing.I had dodged in reflex. “Hey! Knock it off!”She whacked at me again, fanning the air within an inch of my face. I jerked back. This was ludicrous. I wanted to laugh, but the racket had hissed with a savagery that made my stomach lurch. I danced backward as she advanced. She swatted again with the Wilson and missed. Her face had taken on an expression of avid concentration, eyes glittering, lips parted slightly. Behind her, I was dimly aware that Dr. Dunne’s attitude had shifted from wariness to concern.“Elva, that’s enough,” he said.I didn’t think she’d heard him, or if she had, she didn’t care. The racket whacked at me sideways, wielded this time like a broadax. She shifted her weight, her grip two-handed as she sliced diagonally, and sliced again.Whack, whack!Missing me by a hair’s breadth and only because I was quick. She was totally focused and I was afraid if I turned to run, she’d catch me in the back of the head. Take a crack like that and you’re talkin’ blood, folks. Not a fatal impact, but one you’d prefer to skip.Up came the racket again. The wood rim descended like a blade, too swift this time to evade.I took the brunt of it on my left forearm, raised instinctively to shield my face. The racket connected with a cracking sound. The blow was like a white flash of heat up my arm. I can’t say I felt pain. It was more like a jolt to my psyche, unleashing aggression.I caught her in the mouth with the heel of my hand, knocking her back into him. The two of them went down with a mingled yelp of surprise. The air around me felt white and empty and clean. I grabbed her shirt with an unholy strength, hauling her to her feet. Without any thought at all, I punched her once, registering an instant later the smacking sound as my fist connected with her face.Somebody snagged my arm from behind. The desk clerk was hanging on to me, screaming incoherently. My left hand was still knotted in Elva’s shirt. She tried to backstroke out of range, arms flailing as she yodeled with fear, eyes wide.My self-control reasserted itself and I lowered my fist. She fairly crowed with relief, staring at me with astonishment. I don’t know what she’d seen in my face, but I knew what I’d seen in hers. I felt giddy with power, happiness surging through me like pure oxygen. There’s something about physical battle that energizes and liberates, infusing the body with an ancient chemistry-a cheap high with a sometimes deadly effect. A blow to the face is as insulting as you can get, and there’s no predicting what you’ll garner in return. I’ve seen petty barroom disputes end in death over a slap on the cheek.Her mouth was already puffy, her teeth washed with blood. Exhilaration peaked and drained at the sight. Now I could feel pain throb in my arm and I bent with the pulse of it, panting hard. The bruise was a sharp blue vertical line, red welt spreading its blood cloud under the skin. I would swear I could see a raised line where the gut had been strung along the edge of the racket. Set upon by an evil-tempered tennis buff. It was all so damn dumb. Lucky I hadn’t interrupted her at a round of golf. She’d have pounded me to a pulp with her pitching wedge. My knuckles were stinging where the skin had ripped. I hoped her rabies vaccinations were up to date.Elva began to cry piteously, adopting the victim stance when it was she who had tried to savage me! I felt something stir and I yearned to go after her again, but the truth was I hurt, and the need to tend to myself took precedence. Dr. Dunne shepherded his wife into his office. The desk clerk in the orange blazer scurried after them while I leaned against the wall, trying to catch my breath. He might have been calling the sheriff’s department, but I didn’t much care.In a moment the doctor returned, full of soothing apologies and solicitous advice. All I wanted was to get the hell out of there, but he insisted on examining my arm, assuring me it wasn’t broken. God, did the man think I was an idiot? Of course it wasn’t broken. He steered me into the hotel infirmary where he cleaned my battered hand. He was clearly worried, and that interested me more than anything that had transpired so far.“I’m sorry you and Elva had a falling-out.” He dabbed a stinging disinfectant on my hand, his gaze flicking quickly to my face to see if I’d react.I said, “You know women. We get into these little tiffs.” The irony was apparently lost on him.“She’s protective. I’m sure she didn’t mean to offend. She was so upset, I had to give her a sedative.”“I hope you’ve got all your hand tools locked up. I’d hate to see the lady with a crescent wrench.”He began to put his first-aid supplies away. “I think we should try to forget the incident.”“Easy for you to say,” I said. I was flexing my right hand, admiring the way the butterfly Band-Aid closed the cleft in my knuckle formed by Elva’s front teeth. “I take it you still won’t give me information on Jean Timberlake.”He had crossed the room to the sink, where he was washing his hands, his back turned. “I saw her that day,” he said tonelessly. “I explained as much to the police at the time.”“The day she was killed?”“That’s right. She came to my office when she got the results of her pregnancy test.”“Why not have you run the test to begin with?”“I couldn’t tell you that. Perhaps she was embarrassed about the predicament she was in. She said she’d pleaded with the Lompoc doctor to abort her. He’d turned her down and I was next on her list.”He dried his hands thoroughly and hung the towel on the rack.“And you refused?”“Of course.”“Why ‘of course’?”“Aside from the fact that back then abortion was illegal, it’s something I would never do. Her mother survived an illegitimate pregnancy. No reason this girl couldn’t have done the same. The world doesn’t end, though she didn’t seem to see it that way. She said it would ruin her life, but that simply wasn’t true.”While he talked, he unlocked a cabinet and took out a big jar of pills. He shook five into a small white envelope, which he handed to me.“What are these?”“Tylenol with codeine.”I couldn’t believe I’d need painkillers, but I tucked the envelope in my handbag. In my line of work, I get bashed around a lot. “Did you tell Jean’s mother what was going on?”“Unfortunately, no. Jean was a minor and I should have informed her mother, but I agreed to keep the matter confidential. I wish now I’d spoken up. Maybe things would have turned out differently.”“And you have no idea who Jean’s father was?”“I’d try ice on that arm,” he said. “If the swelling persists, come back and see me. At the office, if you don’t mind. There’ll be no charge.”“Did she give you any indication who she was involved with?”Dr. Dunne left the room without another word.I scrounged a long-sleeved shirt out of the backseat of my car and pulled it on over my T-shirt so the rainbow of bruises on my arm wouldn’t show. I sat there for a moment, leaning my head back against the seat, trying to marshal my forces for whatever was coming next. I was done in. It was only four o’clock and I felt as if the day had gone on forever. So many things bothered me. Tap with his shotgun shells loaded with rock salt. The $42,000 unaccounted for. Someone was maneuvering, slipping in and out like a dim figure in the fog. I had caught glimpses, but there was no way to identify the face. I pulled myself upright and started the car, heading into town again so I could talk to Royce.I found the hospital on Johnson, just a few blocks from the high school, the architecture chunky and nondescript. No design awards for this one.Royce was on the medical-surgical floor. The soles of my boots squeaked faintly against the highly polished vinyl tiles. I passed the nurses’ station, following the room numbers. Nobody paid any attention to me as I made my way down the hall, averting my eyes when I passed an open door. The sick, the injured, and the dying have very little privacy as it is. Out of the corner of my eye, I could see that most of them lay abed in a cluster of flower arrangements, get-well cards propped open, their television sets on. I could smell green beans. Hospitals always smell like canned vegetables to me.I came to Royce’s room. I paused just outside the door and disconnected my feelings. I went in. Royce was asleep. He looked like a captive, sides pulled up around his bed, an IV like a tether connecting him to a pole. A clear blue plastic oxygen cone covered his nose. The only sound was the breath whiffling through his lips in an intermittent snore. His teeth had been “taken away from him, lest he bite himself to death. I stood by the bed and watched him.He’d been sweating and his white hair was lank, plastered in long strands across his forehead. His hands lay palms-up on the covers, large and raw, fingers twitching now and then. Was he dreaming, like a dog, of his hunting days? In a month he’d be gone, this ornery mass of protoplasm driven by countless irritations, by dreams, by desires unfulfilled. I wondered if he’d live long enough to have what he wanted most-his son, Bailey, whose fate he’d entrusted to my care.
