---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "F Is for Fugitive - index_split_015.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - F Is for Fugitive"
tags: ["said", "back", "one", "like", "get", "could", "know", "see", "ori", "right", "eye", "made", "woman", "took", "kid", "maxine", "face", "school", "way", "house", "ann", "left", "still", "time", "minute"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/FIsforFugitive-indexsplit015html

---


Unknown
Chapter 14Ann was on her way to the hospital to see her father. The house cleaner, Maxine, had been delayed, but swore she’d be there by ten. In the meantime, Ann felt Ori was too anxious to be left alone. “I’ve called Mrs. Maude. She and Mrs.. Emma agreed to sit with Mother, but neither one can make it till this afternoon. I feel like a dog asking you to fill in...”“Don’t worry about it. I’ll be right down.”“Thanks.”I still had my clothes on, so I didn’t have to waste any time getting dressed. I brushed my teeth and threw some water on my face, ignoring the dark smudges around my eyes. There was a time in my youth when staying up all night had felt adventuresome. Dawn then was exhilarating and there didn’t seem to be any end to the physical resources at my command. Now the lack of sleep was creating an odd high that foreshadowed a stomach-churning descent. I was still on the upswing, gathering momentum as I dragged my body out. Coffee might help, but it would only postpone the inevitable crash. I was going to pay for this.Ori was sitting up in bed, fussing with the ties on her gown. Paraphernalia on the night table and the faint scent of alcohol indicated that Ann had done Ori’s glucose test and had already administered her morning dose of insulin. The trace of blood streaked on the reagent strip had dried to a rusty brown. Old adhesive tape was knotted up on the bed tray like a wad of chewing gum. Stuck to it was a cotton ball with a linty-looking dot of red. This before breakfast. Mentally, I could feel my eyes cross, but I bustled about in my best imitation of a visiting nurse. I was accustomed, from long experience, to steeling myself to the sight of violent death, but this residue of diabetic odds and ends nearly made my stomach heave. Resolutely, I swept it all into a plastic wastebasket and tucked it out of sight, tidying pill bottles, water glass, carafe, and Ace bandages. Usually, Ori had her legs bound in heavy pink stretch wraps, but she was apparently airing them today. I avoided the sight of her mottled calves, the ice-cold feet in which so little circulation pumped, the blue-gray toes, dry and cracked. She had an ulcerated area about the size of a nickel on the inside aspect of her right ankle.“I think I’ll sit down a minute,” I murmured. “Well, honey. You’re pale as a ghost. Go out to the kitchen and get a glass of juice.”The orange juice helped and I ate a piece of toast, cleaning up the kitchen afterward as a way of avoiding the woman in the other room. Three thousand hours of investigative training hadn’t quite prepared me for a sideline as a drudge. I felt like I’d spent half my time on this case washing dirty dishes. How come Magnum, P. I., never had to do stuff like this?At twenty minutes after ten, Maxine appeared, cleaning supplies in a plastic bucket on her arm. She was one of those women with an extra hundred pounds wobbling around her body like a barrel made of flesh. She had one eyetooth the size and color of a rusty nail. Without any pause, she took out a dustrag and began to work her way around the room. “Sorry I’m late, but I couldn’t get that old car to start to save my neck. I finally called and asked John Robert to come over with a set of jumper cables, but it took him a good half hour just to get there. I heard about Royce. God love his heart.”“I’m going to have Ann take me over there this evening,” Ori said. “Provided I feel well enough.”Maxine just clucked and shook her head. “I tell you,” she said. “And I bet you haven’t heard a word from Bailey. No telling where he’s at.”“Aw, and I’m worried sick. I never even laid eyes on him after all this time. And here he’s took off again.”Maxine made a face that conveyed sympathy and regret, then flapped her dustrag to indicate ashift in tone. “Mary Burney’s making a perfect fool of herself. Windows boarded up, big lock on the gate, convinced he’ll go over there and carry her off.”“Well, whatever for?” Ori asked, completely mystified.“I never said she had brains, but then half the people I talked to are loading their guns. Radio says he ‘may be seeking refuge among former acquaintances.’ Just like that. ‘May be seeking refuge.’ Now, if that’s not the silliest thing I ever heard. I told John Robert, ‘Bailey’s got more sense than that,’ I said. ‘For one thing, he doesn’t know Mary Burney from a hole in the ground and besides which, he wouldn’t go anywhere near that place of hers because it backs right up to the National Guard Armory. Chain-link fence and all what kind of thing. Floodlights? Lord God,’ I said. ‘Bailey may be a criminal, but he’s not a retard.’”As soon as I could decently insert myself into the conversation, I told Ori I’d be taking off. Maxine got conspicuously quiet, hoping no doubt to pick up some information she could pass along to John Robert and Mary Burney next chance she had. I avoided giving any indication where I meant to go. The last glimpse I had of them, Maxine was handing Ori a fistful of junk mail to sort through while she applied Lemon Pledge to the top of the bookshelf where the mail had been stacked.Tap Granger’s widow lived on Kaye Street in a one-story frame house with a screened-in porch. The exterior was painted an ancient turquoise trimmed in buttercup, the porch steps eaten through by something that left ominous holes in the wood. She came to the door looking pale and thin, except for the belly that jutted out in front of her like a globe. Her nose was a dull pink from tears, her eyes swollen, with all the makeup cried off. Her hair had the tortured appearance of a recent home permanent. She wore faded jeans that hung on her narrow behind, a sleeveless T-shirt that left her bare arms bony-looking and puckered from the chilly morning air. She had a plump baby affixed to one hip, his massive thighs gripping her bulk like a horseman preparing to post. The pacifier in his mouth looked like some kind of plug you might pull if you wanted to let all the air out. Solemn eyes, runny nose.“I’m sorry to bother you, Mrs. Granger. My name’s Kinsey Millhone. I’m a private investigator. Could I talk to you?”“I guess,” she said. She couldn’t have been much more than twenty-six, with the lackluster air of a woman drained of youth. Where was she going to find someone who’d take on another man’s five kids?The house was small and rustic, the construction crude, but the furnishings looked new. All Sears Revolving Charge Account items, still under warranty. The couch and two matching Barcaloungers were green Naugahyde, the coffee table and the two end tables flanking the couch were blond wood laminate, still unscarred by little children’s shoes. The squat table lamps had pleated shades still wrapped in clear cellophane. She’d be paying it all off till the kids were in high school. She sat down on one couch cushion, which buckled up slightly and let out a sigh as the air was forced out. I perched on the edge of one lounge chair, uneasy about the half-eaten Fluffer-nutter sandwich that kept me company on the seat.“Linnetta, quit doin’ that!” she sang out suddenly, though there didn’t seem to be anyone else in the room. I realized belatedly that the twanging sound of a kid jumping up and down on a bed had just ceased. She shifted the baby, setting him on his feet. He swayed, clutching at her jeans, the pacifier wriggling around in his mouth as he started working it with a little humming sound.“What’d you want?” she said. “The police have been here twice and I already told ’em everything I know.”“I’ll try to be brief. It must be hard on you.”“Doesn’t matter,” she shrugged. The stress of Tap’s death had made her face break out, her chin splotched and fiery pink.“Did you know what Tap was getting involved in yesterday?”“I knew he had some money, but he said he won a bet with this guy who finally paid up.”“A bet?”“Might not have been true,” she said, somewhat defensively, “but God knows we needed it and I wasn’t about to ask after it too close.”“Did you see him leave the house?”“Not really. I’d come in from work and I went straight to bed as soon as him and the kids left. I guess he dropped Ronnie and the girls off and then took Mac to the sitters. He must have drove into San Luis Obispo after that. I mean, he had to, since that’s where he ended up.”“But he never said anything about the breakout or who put him up to it?”“I wouldn’t have stood for it if I’d known.”“Do you know how much he was paid?”Her eyes became wary in the blank of her face. She began to pick idly at her chin. “Nuh-unh.”“No one’s going to take it back. I just wondered how much it was.”“Two thousand,” she murmured. God, a woman with no guile, married to a man with no sense. Two thousand dollars to risk his life?“Are you aware that the shotgun shells were loaded with rock salt?”Again, she gave me that cagy look. “Tap said that way nobody’d get hurt.”“Except him.”Light dawned in that faraway world of the 98 IQ. “Oh.”“Was the shotgun his?”“Nuh-unh. Tap never had a gun. I wouldn’t have one in the house with these kids,” she said.“Do you have any idea at all who he was dealing with?”“Some woman, I heard.”That got my attention. “Really.”Back went the hand to her chin. Pick, pick. “Somebody saw ’em together at the pool hall night before he died.”It took a split second. “Shit, that was me. I was trying to get a lead on this Bailey Fowler business and I knew they’d been friends.”“Oh. I thought maybe him and some woman...”“Absolutely not,” I said. “In fact, he spent half the time showing me pictures of you and the kids.”She colored faintly, tears welling. “That’s sweet. I wish I could help. You seem awful nice.”I took out my card and jotted down the number of the motel on the back. “Here’s where I’ll be for the next couple of days. If you think of anything, get in touch.”“Are you coming to the funeral? It’s tomorrow afternoon at the Baptist church. It should be a good turnout because everybody liked Tap.”I had my doubts about that, but it was clearly something she needed to believe. “We’ll see. I may be tied up, but I’ll be there if I can.” My recollection of Reverend Haws made attendance unlikely, but I couldn’t rule it out. I’d been present at a number of funerals over the last several months, and I didn’t think I could endure another. Organized religion was ruined for me when I was five years old, subjected to a Sunday-school teacher with hairs sticking out of her nose and bad breath. Trust me to point that out. The Presbyterians had suggested the Vacation Bible School at the Congregational Church down the road. Since I’d already been expelled by the Methodists, my aunt was losing heart. Personally, I was looking forward to another flannel board. You could make Baby Jesus with some fuzzies on his back and stick him right up in the sky like a bird, then make him dive-bomb the manger.Joleen left the baby sidestepping his way down the length of the couch while she walked me to the door. The bell rang almost simultaneously with her opening it. Dwight Shales stood on the doorstep, looking as surprised as we were. His glance shifted from her face to mine and then back again. He nodded at Joleen. “Thought I’d stop by and see how you were.”“Thanks, Mr. Shales. That’s real nice of you. This is, unh...”I held my hand out. “Kinsey Millhone. We’ve met.” We shook hands.“I remember,” he said. “I just stopped by the motel, as a matter of fact. If you can hold on a minute, we can have a chat,”“Sure,” I said. I stood there while he and Joleen talked briefly. From their conversation, I gathered that she’d been at the high school not that many years before.“I just lost my wife, and I know how it feels,” he was saying. The authoritarian air I remembered was gone. His pain seemed so close to the surface, it made tears well up in Joleen’s eyes again.“I appreciate that, Mr. Shales. I do. Mrs. Shales was a nice woman and I know she suffered something fierce. You want to come in? I can fix you some tea.”He glanced at his watch. “I can’t right this minute. I’m late as it is, but I’ll stop by again. I wanted you to know we’re all thinking of you over at the high school. Can I help you with anything? You have enough money?”Joleen seemed completely overwhelmed, nose turning rosy, her voice cracking when she spoke. “I’m all right. Mom and Daddy are coming up from Los Angeles tonight. I’ll be fine as soon as they get here.”“Well, you let us know if there’s anything we can do. I can have one of the senior girls look after the kids tomorrow afternoon. Bob Haws said the services are scheduled for two.”“I’d appreciate the help. I hadn’t even thought about who’d be keeping the kids. Will you be at the funeral? Tap’d be awful glad.”“Of course, I’ll be there. He was a fine man and we were all proud of him.”I followed him out to the street, where his car was parked. “I pulled school records on Jean Timberlake,” he said. “If you want to stop by the office, you can see what we’ve got. You have a car? I can give you a lift.”“I better take mine. It’s back at the motel.”“Hop in. I’ll drop you off.”“Are you sure? I don’t want to hold you up.”“Won’t take a minute. I’m headed back in that direction anyway.”He held the door for me and I got in, the two of us chatting inconsequentially during the brief ride back to the Ocean Street. I could have walked, but I was trying to ingratiate myself with the man in the hope that he might have personal recollections of his own to add to whatever data I found in Jean’s file.Ann had returned from the hospital and I saw her peer out of the office window as we pulled up. She and Shales exchanged a smile and a wave and she disappeared.I stepped out of the car, leaning back toward the open window. “I have another errand to run and then I’ll pop by.”“Good. Meanwhile, I’ll check and see if any of the staff have information to contribute.”“Thanks,” I said.As he took off, I turned to find Ann right behind me. She seemed surprised to see him pull away. “He’s not coming in?”“I think he had to get back to the school. I just ran into him over at Joleen Granger’s. How’s your father?”Reluctantly, Ann’s gaze flicked back to my face. “About what you’d expect. Cancer’s spread to his lungs, liver, and spleen. They’re saying now he probably has less than a month.”“How’s he taking it?”“Poorly. I thought he’d made his peace, but he seemed real upset. He wants to talk to you.”My heart sank. It was the last thing I needed, a conversation with the doomed. “I’ll try to get up there sometime this afternoon.”
