---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "F Is for Fugitive - index_split_012.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - F Is for Fugitive"
tags: ["back", "got", "like", "said", "could", "one", "know", "bailey", "shana", "would", "much", "two", "told", "beach", "kid", "water", "big", "nothing", "door", "heard", "look", "bathroom", "running", "along", "left"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/FIsforFugitive-indexsplit012html

---


Unknown
Chapter 11At two o’clock I slipped up the outside stairs at the motel and changed into my running clothes. I hadn’t had lunch, but I was feeling supercharged, too wired to eat. After the hysteria at the courthouse, I’d spent hours in close contact with other human beings and my energy level had risen to an agitated state. I pulled on my sweats and my running shoes and headed out again, room key tied to my laces. The afternoon was slightly chilly, with a haze in the air. The sea blended into the sky at the horizon with no line of demarcation visible between. Southern California seasons are sometimes too subtle to discern, which I’m told is disconcerting to people who’ve grown up in the Midwest and the East. What’s true, though, is that every day is a season in itself. The sea is changeable. The air is transformed. The landscape registers delicate alterations in color so that gradually the saturated green of winter bleaches out to the straw shades of summer grass, so quick to burn. Trees explode with color, fiery reds and flaming golds that could rival autumn anywhere, and the charred branches that remain afterward are as bare and black as winter trees in the East, slow to recover, slow to bud again.I jogged along the walkway that bordered the beach. There was a sprinkling of tourists. Two kids about eight were dodging the waves, their shrieks as raucous as the birds that wheeled overhead. The tide was almost out and a wide, glistening band divided the bubbling surf from the dry sand. A twelve-year-old boy with a boogie board slid expertly along the water’s edge. Ahead, I could see the zigzagging coastline, banded with asphalt where the road followed the contours of the shore. At the road’s end was the Port San Luis Harbor District, a fuel facility and launching area that serviced the local boats.I reached the frontage road and angled left, jogging along the causeway that spanned the slough. Up on the hill to my right was the big hotel with its neatly trimmed shrubs and manicured lawns. A wide channel of seawater angled back along the fairways of the hotel’s golf course. The distance was deceptive and it took me thirty minutes to reach the cul-de-sac at the end of the road where the boats were launched. I slowed to a walk, catching my breath. My shirt was damp and I could feel sweat trickling down the sides of my face. I’ve been in better shape in my life and I didn’t relish the misery of regaining the ground I’d lost. I did the turnaround, watching with interest as three men lowered a pleasure craft into the water from a crane. There was a fishing trawler in drydock, its exposed hull tapering to a rudder as narrow as the blade of an ice skate. I found a spigot near a corrugated metal shed and doused my head, drinking deeply before I headed back, my leg muscles protesting as I increased my pace. By the time I reached the main street of Floral Beach again, it was nearly four and the February sun was casting deep shadows along the side of the hill.I showered and dressed, pulling on jeans, tennis shoes, and a clean turtleneck, ready to face the world.The Floral Beach telephone directory was about the size of a comic book, big print, skimpy on the Yellow Pages, light on advertising space. There was nothing to do in Floral Beach and what there was, everybody knew about. I looked up Shana Timberlake and made a note of her address on Kelley, which, by my calculation, was right around the corner. On my way out, I peered into the motel office, but everything was still.I left my car in the slot and walked the two blocks. Jean’s mother lived in what looked like a converted 1950s motor court, an inverted U of narrow frame cottages with a parking space in front of each. Next door, the Floral Beach Fire Department was housed in a four-car garage painted pale blue with dark blue trim. By the time I got back to Santa Teresa, it would seem like New York City compared with this.There was a battered green Plymouth parked beside unit number one. I peered in the window on the driver’s side. The keys had been left in the ignition, a big metal initial T dangling from the key ring-for Timber-lake, I assumed. Trusting, these folk. Auto theft must not be the crime of choice in Floral Beach. Shana Timberlake’s tiny front porch was crowded with coffee cans planted with herbs, each neatly marked with a Popsicle stick labeled with black ink: thyme, marjoram, oregano, dill, and a two-gallon tomato sauce can filled with parsley. The windows flanking the front door were opened a crack, but the curtains were drawn. I knocked.Presently, I heard her on the other side. “Yes?”I talked through the door to her, addressing my remarks to one of the hinges. “Mrs. Timberlake? My name is Kinsey Millhone. I’m a private detective from Santa Teresa. I wonder if I might talk to you.”Silence. Then, “You the one Royce hired to get Bailey off?” She didn’t sound happy about the idea.“I guess that’s one interpretation,” I said. “Actually, I’m in town to look into the murder. Bailey says now he’s innocent.”Silence.I tried again. “You know, there never was much of an investigation once he pled guilty.”“So what?”“Suppose he’s telling the truth? Suppose whoever killed her is still running around town, thumbing his nose at the rest of us?”There was a long pause and then she opened the door.Her hair was disheveled, eyes puffy, mascara smeared, nose running. She smelled like bourbon. She tightened the sash on her flowered cotton kimono and stared at me blearily. “You were in court.”Yes.She swayed slightly, working to focus. “You believe in justice? You b’lieve justice is done?”“On occasion.”“Yeah, well, I don’t. So what’s there to talk about? Tap’s been shot down. Jean’s choked to death. You think any of this is going to bring my daughter back?”I said nothing, but I kept my gaze on her, waiting for her to wind down.Her expression darkened with contempt. “You prob’ly don’t even have kids. I bet you never even had a dog. You look like somebody breezing through life without a care in this world. Stand there talking about ‘innocence.’ What do you know about innocence?”I kept my temper intact, but my tone was mild. “Let’s put it this way, Mrs. Timberlake. If I had a kid and somebody’d killed her, I wouldn’t be drunk in the middle of the day. I’d be out pulling this town apart until I found out who did it. And then I’d manufacture some justice of my own if that’s what it took.”“Well, I can’t help you.”“You don’t know that. You don’t even know what I want.”“Why don’t you tell me?”“Why don’t you invite me in and we’ll talk.”She glanced back over her shoulder. “Place looks like shit.”“Who cares?”She focused on me again. She could barely stand up. “How many kids you got?”“None.”“That’s how many I got,” she said. She pushed the screen door open and I stepped in.The place was essentially one long room with a stove, sink, and refrigerator lined up at the far end. Every available surface was stacked with dirty dishes. A small wooden table with two chairs divided the kitchen from the living room, one corner of which was taken up by a brass bed with the sheets half pulled off. The mattress sagged in the middle and it looked as if it would erupt in a symphony of springs if you sat on it. I caught a glimpse of bathroom through a curtained doorway to the right. On the other side of the bathroom, there was a closet, and beyond that was the back door.I followed her to the kitchen table. She sank into one of the chairs and then got up again, frowning, and moved with great care to the bathroom where she threw up at length. I hate listening to people throw up. (This is big news, I’ll bet.) I moved over to the sink and cleared the dirty dishes out, running hot water to mask the sounds coming from the bathroom. I squirted dish-washing liquid into the tumbling water and watched with satisfaction as a cloud of bubbles began to form. I slid plates into the depths, tucking silverware around the edges.While the dishes soaked, I emptied the garbage, which consisted almost exclusively of empty whiskey bottles and beer cans. I peered into the refrigerator. The light was out and the interior smelled like mold, the metal racks crusted with what looked like dog doo. I closed the door again, worried I was going to have to take a turn in the bathroom with her.I tuned an ear to Shana again. I heard the toilet galumphing and, after that, the reassuring white noise of a shower being run. Being an incurable snoop at heart, I turned my attention idly to the mail stacked up on the kitchen table. Since I was being mother’s little helper, I felt almost entitled to nose around in her business. I walked my fingers through some unopened bills and junk mail. Nothing of interest on the face of it. There was only one piece of personal mail, a big square envelope postmarked Los Angeles. A greeting card? Curses. The envelope was sealed so tight I couldn’t even pick the flap loose. Nothing visible when I held it to the light. No scent. Shana’s name and address were handwritten in ink, a genderless script that told me nothing about the person who’d penned it. Reluctantly I tucked it back and returned to the sink.By the time I had the dishes clean and piled in a perilous mound in the rack, Shana was emerging from the bathroom, her head wrapped in one towel and her body in another. Without any modesty at all, she dried herself off and got dressed. Her body was much older than her face. She sat down at the kitchen table in jeans and a T-shirt, barefoot. She looked exhausted, but her skin was scrubbed and her eyes had cleared to some extent. She lit an unfiltered Camel. This lady took smoking seriously. I didn’t think unfiltered cigarettes were available these days.I sat down across from her. “When did you last eat?”“I forget. I started drinking this morning when I got back. Poor Tap. I was standing right there.” She paused and her eyes filled with tears again, her nose turning pink with emotion. “I couldn’t believe what was happening. I just lost it. Couldn’t cope. I wasn’t crazy about him, but he was an okay guy. Kind of dumb. A goofball who made awful jokes. I can’t believe this is starting all over. What was he thinking about? He must have been nuts. Bailey comes back to town and look what happens. Somebody else dead. This time it’s his best friend.”“Daisy figures somebody put Tap up to it.”“Bailey did,” she snapped.“Just wait,” I said. “He got a telephone call last night at Pearl’s. He talked briefly and then took off.”She blew her nose. “Must have been after I left,” she said, unconvinced. “You want some coffee? It’s instant.”“Sure, I’ll have some.”She left her cigarette on the lip of the ashtray and got up. She filled a saucepan with water and stuck it on the back burner, turning on the gas. She extracted two coffee mugs from the dish rack. “Thanks for cleaning up. You didn’t have to do that.”“Idle hands...” I said, not mentioning that I’d also managed a little of the devil’s work.She unearthed a jar of instant coffee and a couple of spoons, which she set on the table while we waited for the water to boil. She took another drag from her cigarette and blew the smoke toward the ceiling. I could feel it settle around me like a fine veil. I was going to have to shampoo my hair again and change my clothes.She said, “I still say Bailey killed her.”“Why would he do that?”“Why would anybody else?”“Well, I don’t know, but from what I’ve heard, he was the only real friend she had.”She shook her head. Her hair was still wet, separated into long strands that dampened the shoulders of her T-shirt. “God, I hate this. Sometimes I wonder how she would have ended up. I’ve thought about that a lot. I never was much of a mom in terms of the ordinary stuff, but that kid and I were close. More like sisters.”“I saw some pictures of her in the yearbook. She was beautiful.”“For all the good it did. Sometimes I think her looks were what caused all her problems.”“Do you know who she was involved with?”She shook her head. “I didn’t know she was pregnant until I heard about the coroner’s report. I knew she was sneakin’ out at night, but I have no idea where she went. And what was I supposed to do, nail the door shut? You can’t control a kid that age. I guess maybe I should correct myself. We’d always been close. I thought we still were. If she was in trouble, she could have come to me. I’d have done anything for her.”“I heard she’d been trying to find out about her father.”Shana shot me a startled look, then covered her surprise with busyness. She stubbed out her cigarette and moved over to the stove, where she picked up a pot holder and shifted the saucepan unnecessarily. “Where’d you hear that?”“Bailey. I talked to him at the jail yesterday. You never told her who her father was?”“No.”“Why not?”“I made a deal with him years ago and I kept my part. I might have broken down and told her, but I couldn’t see what purpose it’d serve.”“Did she ask?”“She might have mentioned it, but she didn’t seem all that intent on the answer and I didn’t think much of it.”“Bailey thought she was getting a line on the guy. Was there a way she could have tracked him down?”“Why would she do that when she had me?”“Maybe she wanted acknowledgment, or maybe she needed help.”“Because she was pregnant?”“It’s possible,” I said. “As I understand it, she’d just had it confirmed, but she must have suspected if her period was late. Why else go all the way to Lompoc for a test?”“I have no idea.”“What if she’d found him? What would his reaction have been?”“She didn’t find him,” she said flatly. “He’d have told me.”“Unless he didn’t want you to know.”“What are you getting at?”“Somebody killed her.”“Well, it wasn’t him.” Her voice had risen and I could see the heat in her face.“It could have been an accident. He might have been upset or incensed.”“She’s his daughter, for God’s sake! A seventeen-year-old girl? He’d never do such a thing. He’s a nice man. A prince.”“Why not take responsibility if he was so nice?”“Because he couldn’t. It wasn’t possible. Anyway, he did. He sent money. Still does. That’s all I ever asked.”“Shana, I need to know who he is.”“It’s none of your business. It’s nobody’s business except his and mine.”“Why all the secrecy? What’s the big deal? So he’s married. So what?”“I didn’t say he was married. You said that. I don’t want to discuss it. He’s got nothing to do with this, so just drop it. Ask me any more about him and I’ll throw your ass out the door.”“What about Bailey’s money? Did she ever mention that?”“What money?”I watched her carefully. “Tap told me the two of them had a stash nobody knew about. They asked her to hold it till they got out of jail. That’s the last anybody heard of it.”“I don’t know about any money.”“What about Jean? Did she seem to spend more than she might have made at work?”“Not that I ever saw. If she’d had some, you wouldn’t have caught her livin’ like this.”“You were living here at the time of her death?”“We had an apartment a couple blocks over, but it wasn’t much better.”We talked on for a bit, but I couldn’t elicit any more information. I got back to my room at six o’clock, not much smarter than I was when I’d started out. I typed up a report, fudging the language to disguise the fact that I hadn’t gotten much.
