---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "G Is for Gumshoe - index_split_014.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - G Is for Gumshoe"
tags: ["could", "irene", "said", "like", "house", "face", "eye", "back", "hand", "dietz", "arm", "front", "door", "man", "seemed", "see", "saw", "seen", "one", "look", "someone", "fine", "across", "porch", "window"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/GIsforGumshoe-indexsplit014html

---


Unknown
Chapter 13We started with the house diagonally across from the nursing home. Like many others in the neighborhood, it was substantially constructed, probably built in the early years of the century. The facade was wide, the two-story exterior shingled in cedar tinted with a pale green wash. A prominent gabled porch sat squarely in the center, matching large bay windows reflecting blankly the sprawling branches of an overhanging oak. I thought I saw movement in an upstairs window as we came up the walk. Irene was clinging to my arm for support. Already, I could tell she was going to slow me down, but I didn’t have the heart to mention it. I was hoping her anxiety would ease if she could help in the search.I pressed the bell, which jangled harshly. Moments later, the front door opened a crack and a face appeared, an older woman. The burglar chain was still judiciously in evidence. Had I been a thug, I could have kicked the door open with a well-placed boot.“Yes?”I said, “Sorry to bother you, but we’re talking to everybody in the neighborhood. An elderly woman’s disappeared from the nursing home across the street and we’re wondering if you might have seen her. About seven this morning. We think that’s when she left.”“I don’t get up until eight o’clock these days. Doctor’s orders. I used to get up at five, but he says that’s ridiculous. I’m seventy-six. He says there’s nothing going on at that hour that I need to know about.”“What about your neighbors? Have you heard anybody mention...”She waved an impatient hand, knuckles speckled and thick. “I don’t talk to them. They haven’t cut that hedge in the last fifteen years. I pay the paperboy to come in once a month and trim it up. Otherwise, it’d grow clear up through the telephone wires. They have a dog comes over in my yard, too. Does his business everywhere. I can’t step a foot out without getting dog doodie on my shoe. My husband’s always saying, ‘Pee-you, Ethel. There’s dog doodie on your shoe again.’ “I took out one of my business cards, jotting the number of the nursing home on the back. “Could I leave you my card? That way if you hear anything, you can give me a call. We’d appreciate your help.”The woman took it reluctantly. It was clear she didn’t have much interest in geriatric runaways. “What’s this woman’s name?”“Agnes Grey.”“What’s she look like? I can’t very well identify someone I’ve never laid eyes on before.”I described Agnes briefly. With Irene standing there, I couldn’t very well suggest that Agnes looked like an ostrich.“I’ll keep an eye out,” she said. And then the door closed.We tried the next house, and the next, with about the same results. By the time we reached the corner, forty-five minutes had gone by. It was slow work and so far, unproductive. No one had seen Agnes. We headed east on Concorde. A UPS truck approached and we waited on the curb until we’d seen it pass. I put a hand under Irene’s arm as we crossed the street, supervising her safety as Dietz supervised mine.A fine tremor seemed to be vibrating through the dark green silk of her dress. I studied her uneasily. Years of bleaching had left her hair a harsh white-blond, very thin, as if she’d succeeded finally in eliminating any whisper of color from the wispy strands. She had no brows to speak of, just two brown lines she’d penciled in by hand, wide arcs like a child might have drawn on a happy face. I could see that she might have been considered a beauty once upon a tune. Her features were fine, the blue eyes unusual in their clarity. One of her false lashes had come loose, sticking out like a tiny feather. Her complexion was too pale to seem healthy, but the texture of her skin was remarkable. She reminded me of an obscure one-role movie actress of the forties-someone you’re surprised to find alive after all these years. She put a trembling hand on mine, her fingers so icy that I drew back in alarm. Her breathing was rapid and shallow.“Irene, my God. Your hands are like ice. Are you all right?”“This happens now and then. I’ll be fine in a minute.”“Let’s find you a place to sit down,” I said. We were approaching a three-story clapboard house, tall and narrow with a porch on three sides. The yard was sunny, with the grass newly mown and not much attention to the flower beds. I knew it was a board-and-care because Rosie and I had been given the address. I’d never actually seen the inside of the house. Once Rosie realized there was no wheelchair access, we had crossed it off our list. I remembered the owner as an energetic fellow in his seventies, pleasant enough, but apparently not equipped to handle anyone who wasn’t ambulatory. I’d already opened the shrieking iron gate and I could see the front curtain move as someone peered out. This seemed to be a neighborhood where people were on the watch. I couldn’t believe Agnes had managed to get even half a block without someone spotting her.We reached the front porch and Irene sank down on the bottom step. She put her head between her knees. I put a hand on the back of her neck, peering closely at her face. I could hear the wheezing in her throat.“You want to lie down?”“No, please. I’ll be fine. It’s my asthma acting up. I don’t want a fuss made. Just let me sit here for a bit.”“Just slow your breathing down, okay? You’re starting to hyperventilate. I don’t want you passing out.”I checked the street for Clyde, but he was nowhere to be seen. I climbed the steps and crossed to the front door. The owner of the board-and-care emerged just as I was preparing to ring the bell.He was a man who might have been hefty in his youth. Once-muscular shoulders had softened with age, sloping beneath his shirt. He was clean-shaven and balding, his extended forehead giving him a look of babyhood. He had pouches under his eyes and a mole stuck to his left cheek, like a raisin. “Something I can help you with?” His eyes strayed to Irene and I found my gaze following his. If she fainted, I was going to have a real problem on my hands.“She’ll be all right. She’s feeling light-headed and just needs to sit down for a bit,” I said. “A woman’s disappeared from the nursing home down the block and we’re checking with the neighbors, hoping someone’s seen her.”He had focused on my face, surveying me quizzically. “You look familiar. Do I know you?”“Kinsey Millhone,” I said. “I was here a couple of weeks ago with a friend of mine-”“Right, right, right. I remember now. Spunky little redhead with a sister in a wheelchair. I was sorry we couldn’t accommodate her. She the one who’s missing?”“No. This is someone else,” I said. I held a hand up above my own head, describing her again. “Tall, very thin. She’s been gone since early this morning and we can’t seem to get a line on her. I can’t believe she got far.”“Some of those old folk move fast,” he said. “They can fool you if you don’t keep an eye out. Wish I could help you, but I’ve been working in the back. Have you called the police?”“They were notified first thing. I understand they’ve searched this whole area. We thought we’d try again.”“Happens occasionally, especially in this neighborhood. Usually they turn up.”“Let’s hope. Thanks, anyway.”His gaze strayed back to Irene still sitting on the bottom step. “How about a glass of water for your friend?”“She’ll be okay, but thanks,” I said. I closed the conversation with my usual request for assistance. “Here. Let me leave you my card. If you see the woman or talk to anyone who might have noticed her, could you let me know? If I’m not available, you can always call the nursing home.”He took my card. “Certainly,” he said. Someone spoke to him from inside, a feeble voice, faintly petulant. He excused himself and went in.I helped Irene up. We made our way down the walk and out the gate. She was shaky on her feet, her face drawn and tense.“I really think I ought to take you back,” I said.She shook her head emphatically. “Not yet. I’m feeling better.” She straightened her back as if to illustrate the point.I could see a fine mist of sweat beading on her forehead, but she seemed determined to go on. I had my doubts, but there wasn’t much I could do. “One more, then,” I said, “and then we’ll check back with Clyde.”The house next door was a blocky bungalow with a low-pitched roof, a story and a half sheathed in fawn-brown clapboard. The porch was open and wide, the overhang supported on squat brick stanchions with wooden railings between. We were heading up the walk when I saw one of the wooden porch rails split, raw wood opening up like a flower blossoming. I heard a popping sound and glass broke. I jumped, thinking that some shift in the earth was causing the structure to snap apart. I heard Dietz’s Porsche roar around the corner to our left. I turned to look for him and registered peripherally the UPS delivery truck still idling at the curb. The UPS man was coming up the walk behind us. He was smiling at me and I felt myself smile automatically in response. He was a big man, muscular, clean-shaven, with blond curly hair, stark blue eyes in a tan face, full mouth curving into dimpled cheeks. I thought I must know him because he seemed glad to see me, his eyes soft, the look on his face both sensual and warm. He moved nearer, bending toward me, almost as if he meant to kiss me. He was so close I registered the heady bouquet of his personal scent: gunpowder, Aqua Velva after-shave, and a whiff of Juicy Fruit chewing gum. I felt myself drawing back, perplexed. Behind me, wood snapped like a tree being cracked by lightning. I could see his face suffuse with heat, like a lover at the moment of his climax. He said something. I glanced down at his hands. He seemed to be holding the nozzle of a hose, but why would a UPS man wear gardening gloves? Light spurted from the hose. I blinked uncomprehendingly and then I understood. I grabbed Irene by the arm, nearly lifting her off her feet. I hauled her up the two low stairs and toward the front door. The occupant of the house, a middle-aged man, was opening the front screen, puzzled by the noise. I could tell from his expression he wasn’t expecting company. I snagged him by his shirtfront and shoved him aside, pushing him out of the line of fire as I shouldered us through the door. A front window shattered, spraying glass across the floor. Irene and I went down in a heap. She was too surprised to shriek, but I could hear the wind being knocked out of her as she hit the bare hardwood floor. The door banged back on its hinges, exposing the hallway and the stairs. The owner of the house had taken refuge in the living room, crouched beside the sofa, his arms folded across his head. He reminded me of a little kid who believes he’s invisible just because his eyes are squeezed shut. A bullet ripped a hole through the back wall. Plaster dust blew inward like a bomb going off, with a find cloud rising in its wake.There was silence. I heard someone running, pounding steps receding in the grass, and I knew instinctively that Dietz would give chase. Crouching, I duck-waddled my way into the dining room and peered cautiously out the side window, eyes barely above the sill. I saw Dietz round the corner of the house and disappear. Behind me, Irene was beginning to wail, from fear, from injury, from shock and bewilderment. Belatedly, I felt a rush of adrenaline that made my heart thunder in my throat. My mouth went dry. I clung to the windowsill and laid my cheek against the cold wall, which was papered in cabbage roses, maroon and pink on a field of gray. I closed my eyes. In my mind, the moment was being played out all over again. First the man... that warm light in his eyes, mouth curving up in a familiar smile. The sense that he meant to kiss me, husky voice saying something, then the muzzle flash. From the sound, I knew he’d had a suppressor on the gun, but I’d seen light spurt out. Didn’t seem likely in daylight unless my mind had somehow supplied the image out of past experience. How many shots had he fired? Five? Six?Dietz came into the house, striding across the room. He was winded, tightly controlled, sweating, his manner grim. He pulled me to my feet, his face stony. I could feel his hands digging into my upper arms, but I couldn’t voice a protest.“Are you okay?”He gave me a shake and I nodded, feeling mute. He set me aside like a rag doll and moved away, crossing to Irene who was weeping as piteously as a three-year-old. She sat on the floor with her legs spread, skirt askew, arms limp in her lap, her palms turned up. Dietz put an arm around her, pulling her close. He kept his voice low, reassuring her, bending down so she could hear. He asked her a question. I saw her shake her head. She was gasping, unable to say more than a few words before she was forced to stop for breath.The owner of the house was standing in the hallway, his fear having given way to outrage. “What’s going on here? What is this, a drug bust? I open my door and I nearly get myself killed! Look at the damages. Who’s going to pay for this?”Dietz said, “Shut up and call the cops.”“Who are you? You can’t talk to me that way! This is a private residence.”I sank down on a dining room chair. Through the front window, I could see that neighbors had begun to congregate, murmuring anxiously among themselves-little groups of two and three, some standing in the yard.What had the man said to me? I ran it back again: I’d heard Dietz’s car rumbling in the street and that’s when I’d turned, smiling at the man who was smiling at me. I could hear his words now, understood at last what he’d said to me as he approached-“You’re mine, babe”-his tone possessive, secretive, and then the incredible sexual heat in his face. I felt tears rise, blurring my vision. The window shimmered. My hands began to shake.Dietz patted Irene’s arm and returned to me. He hunkered at my side, his face level with mine. “You did great. You were fine. There was no way you could have known that would happen, okay?”I had to squeeze my hands between my knees so the shaking wouldn’t travel up my arms. I looked at Dietz’s face, gray eyes, the blunt nose. “He tried to kill me.”“No, he didn’t. He tried to scare you. He could have killed you the first time, in Brawley on the road. He could have nailed you just now with the first shot he fired. If he kills you, the game is over. That isn’t what he wants. He’s not a pro. He’s sick. We can use that to get him. Can you understand what I’m saying? Now we know his weakness.”“Yeah, it’s me,” I said, forever flip. Actually, I didn’t understand much of anything. I’d looked into the face of Death. I’d mistaken him for a friend. Other people had tried to kill me-out of vengeance, out of hate. It had never really seemed personal until the man on the walk. No one had ever connected to me as intimately as he had.I glanced over at Irene. Her respiratory distress, instead of subsiding, seemed to be getting worse. Her breathing was rapid, shallow, and ineffectual, the wheezing in her throat like two high-pitched notes on a bagpipe. Her fingertips were turning a shadowy blue. She was suffocating where she sat. “She needs help,” I said.Dietz turned to look at her. “Oh hell...”He was on his feet instantly, striding across the room.The owner of the house was standing at the telephone, repeating his address to the police dispatcher.Dietz said, “We need an ambulance, too,” and then to Irene, “Take it easy. You’ll be fine. We’ll have help for you soon. Don’t panic...”I saw Irene nod, which was as much as she could manage.In the midst of the confusion, Clyde Gersh appeared, drawn by the scattering of neighbors who were standing out in front. He told me later than when he saw the damages to the house his first thought was that Agnes had been discovered and had put up some kind of fight. The last thing he expected was to see Irene on the floor in the midst of a stage III asthma attack. Within minutes, the cops arrived, along with the paramedics, who administered oxygen and first aid, loaded Irene on a gurney, and hustled her away. In the meantime, I felt strangely removed. I knew what was expected and I did as I was told. I rendered a detailed account of events in a monotone, letting Dietz fill in the background. I’m not sure how much time passed before Dietz was allowed to take me home. Time had turned sluggish and it seemed like hours. I never even heard the name of the guy who owned the house. The last glimpse I saw of him, he was standing on the porch, looking like the sole survivor of an 8.8 earthquake.
