---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "G Is for Gumshoe - index_split_005.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - G Is for Gumshoe"
tags: ["back", "like", "woman", "door", "said", "old", "agnes", "might", "place", "right", "grey", "looking", "would", "time", "got", "could", "see", "probably", "someone", "face", "know", "asked", "office", "trailer", "road"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/GIsforGumshoe-indexsplit005html

---


Unknown
Chapter 4The trailer on Rusted-Out Chevy Road was a sorry sight, bearing very little resemblance to the snapshot I had in my possession, which showed an old but sturdy-looking travel trailer, painted flat blue, sitting on four blackwall tires. From the picture, I estimated that it was thirty-some years old, built in the days when it might have been hitched to the back of a Buick sedan and hauled halfway across the country. Now, spray paint had been used to emblazon the siding with the sort of words my aunt urged me to hold to a minimum. Some of the louvers on the windows had been broken out and the door was hanging on one hinge. As I drove by, I saw a unisex person, approximately twelve years of age, sitting on the doorsill in ragged cutoffs, hair in dreadlocks, finger up its nose, apparently mining the contents. I passed the place, did a U-turn and doubled back, pulling over to the side of the road in front. By the time I got out, the doorsill was deserted. I knocked on the doorframe.“Hello?” I sang. Nothing. “Heellloo.” I peered in. The place was empty, at least the portion I could see. The interior, which had probably never been clean, was littered now with trash. Empty bottles and cans were discarded in a heap where a fold-down table should have been. Dust coated most surfaces. The banquette on the right looked like it had been chopped up for firewood. The doors on the kitchen cabinets had all been removed. Cupboards were empty. The tiny four-burner butane-fueled stove looked like it hadn’t been used for months.I glanced to my left, moving down a short passage that led to a small bedroom in the back. A door on the right opened onto a bathroom, which consisted of a defunct chemical toilet, a ragged hole in the wall where a basin had once been attached, and a length of pipe sticking out above a shower pan filled with rags. The bedroom contained a bare mattress and two sleeping bags zipped together and left in a wad. Someone was living here and I didn’t think it was Irene Gersh’s mom. I peered through the window, but all I saw outside was a buff-colored stretch of desert with a low range of mountains ten or fifteen miles away. Distances are deceptive out here because there aren’t any reference points.I picked my way back to the front door and stepped out, circling the trailer. Around the corner, a bucket lined with a plastic bag served as a makeshift outhouse. There were several bags like it, tied at the top and tossed together in a pile, a black fly manufacturing plant. Across the road, there was a concrete pad where a Winnebago was moored. Beside the RV, there was a pickup truck mounted with a camper shell. The pad itself was cracked, weeds growing up through the crevices. A Weber grill had been set out and the smell of charcoal lighter and smoking briquettes drifted across the road to me. Near the grill, there was a folding table surrounded by mismatched chrome chairs. As I crossed the road, a woman emerged from the trailer carrying a tray loaded with a foil-covered plate, condiments, and utensils. She was in her forties, slim, with a long, weathered face. No makeup, salt-and-pepper hair cropped short. She wore blue jeans and a flannel shirt, both faded to a pale gray. She went about her business, ignoring my approach. I watched her put five fat hamburger patties on the grill. She moved over to the table and began to set it with forks and paper plates.“Excuse me,” I said. “Do you know the woman who lives over there?”“You related?”“I’m a friend of the family.”“About time somebody took an interest,” she said snappishly. “What’s going on over there is a low-down disgrace.”“What is going on over there?”“Kids moved in. You can see they trashed the place. Loud parties, loud arguments, fights breaking out. We all make it a point to mind our own business out here, but there’s limits.”“What about Agnes? What happened to her? Surely, she’s not still living there.”The woman cocked a head toward the Winnebago. “Marcus? You want to come out here, please? Woman’s asking about Old Mama.”The door to the Winnebago opened and a man peered out. He was of medium height, small-boned, with warm skin tones suggesting Mediterranean origins. His hair was dark, combed back from his face. His nose was short and straight, his lips very full. His dark eyes were fringed with black lashes. He looked like a male model in an Italian menswear ad. He stared at me for a moment, his expression neutral.“Who’re you?” he asked. No accent. He wore pleated pants and the sort of ribbed undershirt old men wear.“I’m Kinsey,” I said. “Agnes Grey’s daughter asked me to drive out here and check on her. Do you have any idea where she is?”He surprised me by holding out his hand to introduce himself. We shook. His palm was soft and hot, his grip firm.“I’m Marcus. This is my wife, Faye. We haven’t seen Old Mama for a long tune. Like, months. We heard she got sick, but I don’t know for sure. Hospital in Brawley. You might see if she’s there.”“Wouldn’t somebody have notified her relatives?”Marcus stuck his hands in his pockets with a shrug. “She might not’ve told them. This’s the first I knew she had family. She’s a real private person. Like a recluse almost. Minds her own business as long as you mind yours. Where’s this daughter live?”“Santa Teresa. She’s been worried about Agnes but she didn’t have a way to get in touch.”Neither of them seemed impressed with the sincerity of Irene’s concern. I changed the subject, looking back at the trailer across the road. “Who’s the little gremlin I saw sitting on the front step?”Faye spoke up, her tone sour. “There’s two of them. Boy and a girl. They came by a few months ago and staked the place out. They must have heard it was empty because they moved in pretty quick. Runaways. Don’t know how they survive. Probably stealing or whoring, whichever comes first. We asked them to clean up the sewage, but of course they don’t.”Clearly, sewage was a euphemism for the bags of sewage. “The kid I saw couldn’t have been twelve years old,” I said.Faye answered. “They’re fifteen. Boy is, at any rate. They act like wild animals and I know they do drugs. They’re always picking through our garbage, looking for food. Sometimes, other kids come by and camp out with them. Word must be out they have a place to crash.”“Can’t you report ’em to the cops?”Marcus shook his head. “Tried that. They vamoose the minute anybody shows up.”“Could there be a connection between Agnes’s disappearance and their moving in?”“I doubt it,” he said. “She’d been gone a couple months by the time they got here. Somebody might have told them the trailer was empty. They never seemed to worry about her showing up. I know they’ve torn the place apart, but there’s not much we can do.”I gave him my card. “This is my number in Santa Teresa. I’ll be down here a couple of days seeing if I can get a line on her. After that, you can reach me at this 805 area code. Would you give me a call if she gets in touch? I’ll try to check back with you before I leave town, in case you’ve heard from her. Maybe you’ll think of something that might be of help.”Faye peered over his shoulder at the card I’d given him. “A private detective? I thought you said you were a family friend.”“A hired friend,” I said. I had started back to my car when he called my name. I turned and looked at him.“There’s a sheriff’s substation in Niland, right next to the old jail on First. You might check with the deputy. There’s always a possibility she’s dead.”“Don’t think it hasn’t occurred to me,” I said. His gaze held mine briefly and then I moved on.I headed back toward the township of Niland, 145 feet below sea level, population twelve hundred. The old jail is a tiny stucco structure with a shake roof and an ornamental iron wheel attached to the wooden porch rail. Next door, not ten feet away, is the new jail, housed in the sheriff’s substation, also stucco and not much wider than the width of one door and two windows. An air conditioner hung out of a window around on the side. I parked out in front. A note was taped to the front door. “Back at 4:00 p.m. In emergency or other business talk to Brawley deps.” Not a clue about how to contact the Brawley sheriff’s department.I stopped at a gas station and while the tank was being filled, I found a pay phone and checked the dogeared directory that was chained to the wall, looking up the telephone number of the Brawley sheriff’s department. From the address listed, I had to guess it wasn’t far from my motel on Main. In a quick call, I learned that Sergeant Pokrass, the deputy I should be talking to, was presently at lunch and would be back at one o’clock. A glance at my watch showed it was 12:50.The sheriff’s substation is a one-story stucco building with a red tile roof, located right across the street from the Brawley Police Department. There were two white sheriff’s cars parked in the narrow lot. I went in through a glass door. A Pepsi machine dominated the corridor. To the left of the entrance was a closed door that, according to the sign, led to a courtroom. On the other side of the hallway were two small offices with an open door between them. The interior was polished brown linoleum, Formica countertops, light wood desks, metal file cabinets, swivel chairs. There were two deputies and a civilian clerk in sight, the latter on the telephone. The low murmur of conversation was underscored by the steady, low ratchet of the police radio.Deputy Pokrass turned out to be a woman in her thirties, tall and trim, with sandy hair cut short, glasses with tortoiseshell rims. The tan uniform seemed designed for her: all function, no frills. There was very little animation to her face. Her eyes were a penetrating brown, rather cold, and her manner, while not actually rude, was on the abrupt side of businesslike. We didn’t waste a lot of time on pleasantries. I stood at the short counter and filled her in on the situation, keeping my account brief and to the point. She listened intently, without comment, and when I finished she picked up the telephone. She called the local hospital, Pioneers Memorial, and asked for the patient billing and accounting department, her voice wanning only slightly in her conversation with someone named Letty on the other end. She pulled a yellow legal pad closer and picked up a pencil sharpened to a perfect point. She made a note, her handwriting full of angular down-strokes. I was sure that, even at the age of twelve, she’d never been the type to make a little happy face when she dotted an i. She hung up the phone and used a straightedge to tear off the strip of paper on which she’d written an address.“Agnes Grey was admitted to Pioneers on January 5, through emergency after the paramedics picked her up outside a downtown coffee shop where she collapsed. Diagnosis by the admitting physician was pneumonia, malnutrition, acute dehydration, and dementia. On March 2, she was transferred to Rio Vista Convalescent Hospital. This is the address. If you locate her, let us know. Otherwise you can come back in and fill out a missing persons report. We’ll do what we can.”I glanced at the paper, then folded it and put it in my jeans pocket. “I appreciate your help.” By the time I got the sentence out, she’d turned away, already back at work on the report she was typing. I used my proffered hand to scratch my nose, feeling the way you do when you wave back at someone who turns out to be waving happily at someone else.On the way to my car, it occurred to me that the admissions officer at the convalescent home might be reluctant to give me information on Agnes Grey. If she was still a patient, I could probably get a room number and whip right in. If she’d been released, things might get trickier. Medical personnel aren’t as chatty as they used to be. Too many lawsuits over the right to privacy. Best not blow my chances, I thought.I went back to the Vagabond, where I unzipped the duffel and removed my all-purpose dress. I gave it a shake. This faithful garment is the only dress I own, but it goes anyplace. It’s black, collarless, with long sleeves and a zipper down the back, made of some slithery, miracle fabric that takes unlimited abuse. You can smush it, wad it up, sit on it, twist it, or roll it in a ball. The instant you release it, the material returns to its original state. I wasn’t even sure why I’d brought it-hoping for a hot night on the town, I suppose. I tossed it on the bed, along with my (slightly scuffy) low-heeled black shoes and some black panty hose. I took a three-minute shower and redid myself. Thirteen minutes later I was back in the car, looking like a grown-up, or so I hoped.The Rio Vista Convalescent Hospital was set in the middle of a residential area, an old two-story stucco building painted a tarnished-looking Navajo white. The property was surrounded by chain-link fence, wide gates standing open onto a parking lot. The place didn’t look like any hospital I’d ever seen. The grounds were flat, unlandscaped, largely sealed over in cracked asphalt on which cars were parked. As I approached the main entrance, I could see that the brittle blacktop was limned with faded circles and squares of some obscure sort. It wasn’t until I’d passed through the main doors and was standing in the foyer that I knew what I’d been looking at. A playground. This had once been a grade school. The lines had been laid out for foursquare and tetherball. The interior was nearly identical to the elementary school I’d attended. High ceilings, wood floors, the sort of lighting fixtures that look like small perfect moons. Across from me, a water fountain was still mounted on the wall, white porcelain with shiny chrome handles down low at kiddie height. Even the air smelled the same, like vegetable soup. For a moment, the past was palpable, laid over reality like a sheet of cellophane, blocking out everything. I experienced the same rush of anxiety I’d suffered every day of my youth. I hadn’t liked school. I’d always been overwhelmed by the dangers I sensed. Grade school was perilous. There were endless performances: tests in spelling, geography, and math, homework assignments, pop quizzes, and workbooks. Every activity was judged and criticized, graded and reviewed. The only subject I liked was music because you could look at the book, though sometimes, of course, you were compelled to stand up and sing all by yourself, which was death. The other kids were even worse than the work itself. I was small for my age, always vulnerable to attack. My classmates were sly and treacherous, given to all sorts of wicked plots they learned from TV. And who would protect me from their villainy? Teachers were no help. If I got upset, they would stoop down to my level and their faces would fill my field of vision like rogue planets about to crash into earth. Looking back on it, I can see how I must have worried them. I was the kind of kid who, for no apparent reason, wept piteously or threw up on myself. On an especially scary day, I sometimes did both. By fifth grade, I was in trouble almost constantly. I wasn’t rebellious-I was too timid for that-but I did disobey the rules. After lunch, for instance, I would hide in the girls’ rest room instead of going back to class. I longed to be expelled, imagining somehow that I could be free of school forever if they’d just kick me out. All my behavior netted me were trips to the office, or endless hours in a little chair placed in the hall. A public scourging, in effect. My aunt would swoop down on the principal, an avenging angel, raising six kinds of hell that I should be subjected to such abuse. Actually, the first time I got the hall penalty, I was mortified, but after that, I liked it pretty well. It was quiet. I got to be alone. Nobody asked me questions or made me write on the board. Between classes, the other kids hardly looked at me, embarrassed on my behalf.“Miss?”I glanced up. A woman in a nurse’s uniform was staring at me. I focused on my surroundings. I could see now that the corridor was populated with wheel-chairs. Everyone was old and broken and bent. Some stared dully at the floor and some made mewing sounds. One woman repeated endlessly the same quarrelsome request: “Someone let me out of here. Someone let me up. Someone let me out of here...”“I’m looking for Agnes Grey.”“Patient or employee?”“A patient. At least she was a couple of months back.”“Try administration.” She indicated the offices to my right. I collected myself, blanking out the sight of the feeble and infirm. Maybe life is just a straight shot from the horrors of grade school to the horrors of the nursing home.The administration offices were housed in makeshift quarters where the principal’s office had probably been once upon a time. A portion of the large central hallway had been annexed and was now enclosed in glass, providing a small reception area, which was furnished with a wooden bench. I waited at the counter until a woman emerged from the inner office with an armload of files. She caught sight of me and veered in my direction with a public-relations smile. “May I help you?”“I hope so,” I said. “I’m looking for a woman named Agnes Grey. I understand she was a patient here a few months ago.”The woman hesitated briefly and then said, “May I ask what this is in connection with?”I took a chance on the truth, never guessing how popular I was going to be as a consequence. I gave her my card and then recited my tale of Irene Gersh and how she’d asked me to determine her mother’s whereabouts, ending with the oft-repeated query: “Do you happen to know where she is at this point?”She blinked at me for a moment. Some interior process caused a transformation in her face, but I hadn’t the faintest idea how it related to my request. “Would you excuse me, please?”“Sure.”She moved into the inner office and emerged a moment later with a second woman, who introduced herself as Mrs. Elsie Haynes, administrator of the facility. She was probably in her sixties, rotund, with a hairstyle that was whisker-short along the neck and topped by a toupee of ginger-colored curls. This made her face appear too large for her head. She was, however, smiling at me most pleasantly. “Miss Millhone, how very nice,” she said, holding out her hands. The handshake consisted of her making a hand sandwich with my right hand as the lunch meat. “I’m Mrs. Haynes, but you must call me Elsie. Now how can we be of help?”This was worrisome. I usually don’t get such receptions in my line of work. “Nice to meet you,” I said. “I’m trying to locate a woman named Agnes Grey. I understand she was transferred here from Pioneers.”“That’s correct. Mrs. Grey has been with us since early March. I’m sure you’ll want to see her, so I’ve asked the floor supervisor to join us. She’ll take you up to Mrs. Grey’s room.”“Great. I’d appreciate that. Frankly, I didn’t expect to find her here. I guess I thought she’d be out by now. Is she doing okay?”“Oh my, yes. She’s considerably better... quite well... but we have been concerned about continued care. We can’t release a patient who has no place to go. As nearly as we can tell, Mrs. Grey doesn’t have a permanent address and she’s never admitted to having any next of kin. We’re delighted to hear that she has relatives living in the state. I’m sure you’ll want to notify Mrs. Gersh and make arrangements to have her transferred to a comparable facility in Santa Teresa.”Ahh. I felt myself nodding. Her Medi-Cal benefits were running out. I tried a public-relations smile of my own, unwilling to commit Irene Gersh to anything. “I’m not sure what Mrs. Gersh will want to do. I told her I’d call as soon as I found out what was going on. She’ll probably need to talk to you before she makes any decisions, but I’m assuming she’ll ask me to drive Agnes back to Santa Teresa with me.”She and her assistant exchanged a quick look.“Is there a problem with that?”“Well, no,” she said. Her gaze shifted to the doorway. “Here’s Mrs. Renquist, the ward supervisor. I think she’s the person you should properly discuss this with.”We went through another round of introductions and explanations. Mrs. Renquist was perhaps forty-five, thin and tanned, with a wide, good-natured mouth and the dusky, lined complexion of a smoker. Her dark auburn hair was pulled back in a knot shaped like a doughnut, probably supported by one of those squishy nylon devices they sell at Woolworth’s. The three women seemed to hover about me like secular nuns, full of murmurs and reassurances. Within minutes, Mrs. Renquist and I were out in the corridor, heading toward the ward.
