---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "G Is for Gumshoe - index_split_028.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - G Is for Gumshoe"
tags: ["messinger", "rochelle", "could", "said", "dietz", "like", "back", "eric", "toward", "face", "gun", "plane", "car", "see", "hand", "head", "away", "get", "got", "u", "across", "take", "one", "know", "door"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/GIsforGumshoe-indexsplit028html

---


Unknown
Chapter 27He stood in the kitchen doorway, a brown grocery bag in his arms. He wore a dark green sport shirt and wash pants, belted below his waist. He was wheezing from exertion, sweat beading his face. His gaze was fixed on the length of vinyl wallpaper that now lay on the floor, folded over on itself. His gaze traveled up the wall and then jerked across to mine. “What’d you do that for?”“Time to take care of old business, my friend.”He crossed to the kitchen table and set the grocery bag down. He removed some items-toilet paper, a dozen eggs, a pound of butter, a loaf of bread-and set them on the table. I could see him try to settle on an attitude, the proper tone. He’d been rehearsing this in his mind for years, probably confident the conversation was one he could handle with a perfect air of innocence. The problem was, he’d forgotten what innocence felt like or how it was supposed to look. “What old business?”“All the blood on the wall for one.”The pause was of the wrong length. “What blood? That’s a redwood stain. I refinished a piece of porch furniture and knocked the can off on the floor. Stuff sprayed all over, went everyplace. You never saw such a mess.”“Arterial blood will do that. You get a pumping effect.” I tromped over the crumpled strip of paper, with a scrabbling sound, and washed my hands at the kitchen sink.He put a half gallon of ice cream in the freezer, taking a moment to rearrange boxes of frozen vegetables. His rhythm was off. An accomplished liar knows how important the timing is in conveying nonchalance.I dried my hands on a kitchen towel of doubtful origin. It might have been a part of a pillow case, a paint rag, or a diaper. “I drove over to Mt. Calvary and looked for Anne’s grave.”“Make your point. I got work to do. She’s buried with the family on the side of the hill.”“Not quite,” I said. I leaned against the counter, watching him unload canned goods. “I went into the office and asked to see the interment card. You bought her a stone, but there’s no body in the grave. Anne left town with Irene in January nineteen forty.”He tried to get huffy, but he couldn’t muster any heat. “I paid to bring her all the way from Tucson, Arizona. If she wasn’t in the coffin, don’t tell me about it. Ask the fellow on the other end who said he put her there.”“Oh, come on,” I said. “Let’s cut to the chase. There wasn’t any husband in Arizona and there weren’t any little kids. You made that stuff up. You killed Charlotte and Emily. You killed Sheila, too. Anne was alive until late last night and she told me most of it. She said Emily wanted to sell the house and you refused. She must have pressed the point and you were forced to eliminate her just to end the argument. Once you got Emily out of the way, there was only Anne to worry about. Have her declared dead and you collect the whole estate....”He began to shake his head. “You’re a crazy woman. I got nothing to say to you.”I crossed to the wall-mounted telephone near the hall door. “Fine with me. I don’t care. You can talk to Lieutenant Dolan as soon as he gets here.”Now he was willing to argue the point, any means to delay. “I wouldn’t kill anyone. Why would I do that?”“Who knows what your motivation was? Money is my guess. I don’t know why you did it. I just know you did.”“I did not!”“Sure you did. Who are you trying to kid?”“You don’t have a shred of proof. You can’t prove anything.”“I can’t, but somebody can. The cops are really smart, Patrick, and persistent? My God. You have no idea how persistent they are where murder’s concerned. The whole of modern technology will be brought to bear. Lab techs, machinery, sophisticated tests. They’ve got experts out the wazoo and what do you have? Nothing. A lot of hot air. You don’t stand a chance. Fifty years ago you might have fooled ’em, but not these days. You’re up shit creek, pal. You are totally screwed...”“Now see here. You wait a minute, young lady. I won’t have that kind of talk used in my house,” he said.“Oh, sorry. I forgot. You’ve got standards. You’re not going to tolerate a lot of smutty talk from me, right?” I turned back to the telephone. I had picked up the receiver when the window shattered in the back. The two acts came so close together, it looked like cause and effect. I pick up the phone, the window breaks out. Startled, I jumped a foot and dropped the phone in the process, jumping again as the handset thumped against the wall. I saw a hand come through the shattered window and reach around to unlock the door. One savage kick and the door swung back abruptly and banged against the wall. I had grabbed my handbag and was just reaching for my gun when Mark Messinger appeared, his own gun drawn and pointed at me. The suppressor created the illusion of a barrel fourteen inches long.This time there was no smile, no aura of sexuality. His blond hair stood out around his head in damp spikes. His blue eyes were as cold and as blank as stone. Patrick had turned, heading toward the front door in haste. Messinger fired at him casually, not even pausing long enough to form an intent, the shooting as simple as pointing a finger. Spwt! The sound of the silenced. 45 semiautomatic was almost dainty compared to its effect. The force of the bullet drove Patrick into the wall where he bounced once before he fell. Blood and torn flesh bloomed in his chest like a chrysanthemum, shreds of cotton shirting like the calyx of a flower. I was staring at him mesmerized when Messinger grabbed me by the hair, hauling my face up within an inch of his. He shoved the barrel of his gun under my chin, pressing so hard it hurt. I wanted to protest the pain of it, but I didn’t dare move. “Don’t shoot me!”“Where’s Eric?” he breathed.“I don’t know.”“You’re going to help me get him back.’Fear had pierced my chest wall like splinters. All the adrenaline was coursing upward to my brain, driving out thought. I had a brief image of Dietz with Rochelle Messinger. They’d evidently succeeded in plucking the kid from his father’s grasp. I could smell chlorine from the swimming pool, mingled with Messinger’s breath. He probably couldn’t take his gun to the pool without calling attention to himself. I pictured him in the water, Eric on the side just waiting to jump in. If his mother appeared, he’d have run straight to her with a shriek of joy. By now they were probably barreling out to the airport. The plane had been chartered for nine to allow time for the snatch. I willed the thought away. Made my mind blank.Messinger slapped me across the face hard, setting up a ringing in my head. I was dead. I wouldn’t get out of this one alive. He shoved me toward the back door, kicking a chair out of my path. I caught sight of Ernie, the old guy, shuffling toward the kitchen. His expression was perplexed, especially when he spotted Patrick on the floor with the corsage of blood pinned to the center of his chest. Mark Messinger turned and pointed the gun at the old man.“Oh don’t!” I burbled. My voice sounded strange, high-pitched and hoarse. I squeezed my eyes shut and waited for the spwt! I looked back. The old fellow had pivoted and was shuffling away in panic. I could hear his howls echo down the hall, as frail and helpless as a child’s. Messinger watched him retreat, indecision flickering in his eyes. He lost interest and turned his attention back to me. “Get the car keys.”I saw the bag where I’d dropped it on the floor near the phone. I pointed, temporarily unable to speak. I longed for my gun.“We’ll take my car. You drive.”He grabbed me by the head and buried his grip in my hair again, propelling me with a fury that made me cry out in fear.“Shut up,” he whispered. His face was close to mine as we descended the back stairs. I stumbled, grabbing at the rail with my right hand for balance. My heel slipped off the stair and I nearly went down. I thought he’d pull all my hair out, effectively scalping me with his closed fist, which held me like a vise. I couldn’t look down, couldn’t move my head to either side. I could feel the gravel driveway underfoot. I proceeded like a blind woman, hands out, using senses other than sight. The car was parked in the drive near the shed. I wondered briefly if a neighbor would spot our clumsy progress. Nearly dark now. In my mind’s eye, I could see Rochelle’s face. Please be on the plane, I thought. Please be in the air. Take Dietz with you forever and keep him somewhere safe. I pictured his impatience, his intensity. I willed him into a taxi, drove him away from the danger. I couldn’t save him, couldn’t even save myself this time around. Messinger yanked open the door on the passenger side and pushed me across the front seat. He was driving a yellow Rolls-Royce: walnut dashboard, leather upholstery.“Start the car,” he said. He got in after me, crowding close. He placed the barrel of the gun against my temple. He was breathing hard, his tension concentrated in his grip on the gun. If he shot me, I wouldn’t feel it. I’d be dead before the pain could travel along my nerve ends and get the message to my brain. I willed the act, wanted it over with. “Do it,” he said. I thought the voice was mine, so nearly did it mimic my thought.“Start the fuckin’ car!” His anger was erratic, sometimes fire, sometimes ice, his command of himself veering inexplicably from unbridled impulse to rigid control.I felt for the keys in the ignition.“Where’d they take my son?”“They didn’t tell me.”“You lying bitch! I’ll tell you then.” He dropped his voice and I could feel the force of his words against my cheek. The sexuality was back, the same tickle of desire that rises when you dance with a man for the first time-some awareness of the flesh and all the possibilities that wait. He was calm again, confident, his throaty laugh nearly jubilant. “Rochelle’s got a twin brother flies a plane,” he said. “She knows better than to take Eric back to her place because I’d find him first thing and she’d be dead before she shut the door. She’ll try to get him out by air, take him off and hide him somewhere till things cool down.” He moved the gun away from my head, gesturing with the barrel. “Back out on the street and take a left. We’ll head out to the airport, there’s a charter place out there. Drive carefully, okay?”I nodded dumbly, my mood shifting as abruptly as his. So far, I was alive, not maimed or disabled. I was grateful he hadn’t hurt me, thrilled I wasn’t dead. I did as I was told. I felt absurdly happy that his manner was pleasant, his tone nearly friendly as I backed out of the drive. He’d reduced my habitual cockiness to humility. There was still hope. There was still a chance. Maybe they’d already left. Maybe they were gone. Maybe I could kill him before he killed me. I had a flash of Rochelle being shot in the chest. He’d kill her as carelessly as he’d killed Patrick Bronfen, with the same matter-of-factness, the same casualness, the same ease. Dietz would die. Messinger would trade me for Eric at the outset and then kill us all. Rochelle, Dietz, and me, in whatever order would maximize the horror. I focused on the road, suddenly conscious of the car. I could smell leather seats, the fresh rose in a crystal vase. The car glided in silence. I turned right on 101 and flew north. There was not a highway patrol car in sight.My mouth was dry. I cleared my throat. “How did you know where I was?”“I put a bug on the Porsche the first night it was parked in front of your place. See this? My receiver. I’ve been following you guys everywhere in a couple of different rental cars.”“Why’d you kill Patrick?”“Why not. He’s a dickface.”I glanced over at him curiously. “Why’d you spare Ernie?”“That old fart? Who knows? Maybe I’ll go back and do him now you mention it,” he said. His tone was teasing. A little hit-man humor to show what a devil-may-care kind of guy he was. He’d taken the gun away from my head and it rested now on his knee. “What’s the story with this bodyguard? He’s a pain in the ass. Two times I nearly had you and he stepped in.”I kept my eyes on the road. “He’s good at his job.”He looked over at me. “You makin’ it with him?”“That’s none of your business.”“Come on...”“I’ve only known him four days!” I said, righteously.“So what?”“So I don’t jump into bed with guys that quick.”“You should have done while you had the chance. Now he’s a dead man. I’ll make you a deal. How’s this? Him or you. Better yet, Rochelle or him. Take your pick. If you don’t choose, I kill all three of you.”“You’re only getting paid for one.”“True, but I’ll tell you, the money doesn’t mean that much. When you do what you love, you’d do it for free, am I right?” He leaned toward the tape deck. “Want some music? I got jazz, classical, R B. No heavy metal or reggae. I hate that shit. You want Sinatra?”“No thanks.” I saw the off-ramp for the university and the airport and eased right. The road curved up and to the left, crossing the freeway, which now passed underneath. It was gone and we hit the straightaway. Two more minutes to the airport and what was I going to do? The digital clock on the instrument panel showed that it was 8:02. A mile farther on, the access ramp to Rockpit Road came into view on the right. I took the turn. I knew the ocean was close by, but all I could smell was the rotten-egg odor of the slough that hugged the road. A fog was rolling in, a dense bank of white against the blackened sky. The university sat up on the bluffs like a walled city, all lights and buff-colored towers. I’d never gone to college. I was strictly blue-collar lineage-like this guy, come to think of it. Like Dietz.I took Rockpit for half a mile until the hangars and assorted outbuildings of Neptune Air appeared on the left. “Here,” he said. I slowed the Rolls and turned in. Messinger sat forward, peering through the windshield, which had been spritzed with fine mist.There were four miscellaneous vehicles parked in the lot, but there was no sign of Rochelle’s rental car. Messinger had me park the Rolls in the lee of a metal-sided hangar. Under the inverted V of the roofline, illuminated by a single bulb, the sign read: FLIGHT INSTRUCTION, FAA REPAIR STATION, 24 HOUR CHARTERS, PIPER DEALER, AND AVIONICS SALES SERVICES. The perimeter fence was made of chain link, wrapped with barbed wire on top, and padlocked. Warnings were posted at intervals. Floodlights on the far side of the hangar glowed blankly on the empty runway.We left the car. It was cold and a wind whipped along the tarmac, blowing my hair in all directions. As we crossed the parking lot, Messinger took me by the elbow in a gesture so reminiscent of Dietz that the air caught in my throat.The offices of Neptune Air were closed, the interior darkened, one dim light shining through the plate glass. We circled the building. A broad redwood deck stretched out across the rear. A picnic table and two benches had been set up for those waiting for their charter flights. I pictured the Neptune employees (all three of them) eating lunch out here, watching planes land, drinking canned sodas from the vending machine. To the right, there was a line of small private planes tied down on the tarmac. Beyond them, half a mile away, I could see the Santa Teresa Airport, the upper portion of its tower peeking up above a row of storage sheds. On one of the runways, a United 737 was lumbering across the field in preparation for takeoff. Messinger gestured and we sat down on opposite sides of the picnic table. “It’s fuckin’ cold out,” he said.I heard voices behind me. I turned and watched as two workmen, probably fuelers, locked the exit door to the hangar and moved off toward the parking lot. Messinger rose to his feet, peering in their direction. He pulled the nose of the. 45 up and pointed, making little noises with his mouth... pow, pow. He blew imaginary smoke away from the barrel and then he smiled. “They don’t know how lucky they are, do they?”“I guess not,” I said.He sat down again.His hair had dried into ringlets and the wind lifted them playfully. His eyes glinted in the light from a bulb at the upper corner of the building. He was watching me with interest. “Your daddy ever bring you out here to watch planes?”“He died when I was five.”“Mine didn’t either. Cocksucker. No wonder I turned out bad.”“What, he didn’t show up to watch you play Little League?”“He didn’t do much of anything except drink, fornicate, and kill folk. That’s where I got all my talent. From him.”My fear had receded and in its place, I was beginning to feel a characteristic crankiness settle in. It was one thing to die, and quite another being forced to sit around in a cold wind making small talk with a fatuous ass like Messinger. I’d been thinking I better make nice. Now I wondered what the point was. In the meantime, he was staring at my face. I stared back, just to see what it would feel like.He nodded judiciously. “Your black eye’s looking better.”I ran a finger along my orbital ridge. I kept forgetting what I must look like to the uninitiated observer. The last time I’d assayed my various injuries, I’d noticed the bruises had changed hues dramatically. A lemon-yellow backdrop now blended into lime-green, which was overlaid with plum. “You nearly got me that round.”He waved the compliment away. “That was just a warm-up. I wasn’t serious.”“What’d Eric think of it?”“Didn’t bother him. Look at cartoons. Kids see violence all the time and it doesn’t count for shit. People don’t really die. It’s all special effects.”“I doubt he’s going to feel that way if you shoot his mom.”“Not if I shoot her-when.” I saw his gaze shift.Out on the runway, a tiny plane had landed, sounding like a VW in need of a new fan belt. I lost sight of the aircraft behind some outbuildings and then the plane appeared again, puttering toward us. He got to his feet. “I bet this is him. Come on. And keep your mouth shut or I’ll pop you one.”The plane reached the concrete apron beside the hangar and the pilot made a miniature U-turn so that he was now facing out toward the runway. He cut the engine, doused the lights. Messinger had gripped me across the back of the neck, marching me toward the plane in quickstep. I imagined the pilot taking off his headset, writing in his logbook, loosening his seat belt. If this was Rochelle’s brother, he was going to recognize Messinger as soon as he caught sight of him.A column of fear wafted up my spine like smoke. I tried to hang back, resisting, but Messinger’s fingers dug into my neck with excruciating pain. We had picked up the pace, almost trotting side by side until we reached the tail unit of the plane. Just in front of us, the door to the cockpit opened and the pilot stepped down. We were less than six feet away.Messinger said, “Hey, Roy?”I screamed a warning.The pilot turned in surprise.Spwt!Roy dropped to his knees. He toppled forward on his face. His nose had been shattered by the bullet, which took out a chunk of skull when it exited. I cried out in horror, recoiling from the sight. I felt tears like a stinging blow. A quick cloud of gunpowder perfumed the night air. I put a hand against the plane for support. Messinger had already lifted the dead man by the arms and he was dragging him backward across the tarmac toward the slanted shadows of the hangar.I pushed away from the plane. I took off, running for dear life. I headed toward the parking lot, hoping to reach the road.“Hey!”I could hear Messinger behind me, pounding hard. I didn’t dare look. He was faster than I and he was gaining. I felt the shove that sent me tumbling forward on my hands. I tried to roll, but I wasn’t quick enough to save myself. I was down and he was on me, winded and raging. He pulled me over on my back. I kept my arms up to ward off the blows he aimed at me.Something caught his attention and his face jerked up. A car was approaching from the direction of the slough. He pulled me to my feet, half-dragging, half-hauling me across the concrete toward the shelter of the building. He backed up against the stucco, my body clamped against his, half tucked under his armpit. He had his one hand across my mouth, the barrel of the gun at my temple again. I was close to suffocation, both of us breathing hard.The car pulled into the parking lot. I heard two car doors slam, one right after the other, and then the murmur of voices. I saw Rochelle first, heard her heels tapping on the pavement, saw the pale cheeks, the pale hair above the turned-up collar of her trenchcoat. Eric walked beside her, his face tilted toward hers. The two were holding hands. Dietz was locked up close to her, his attention focused on the surrounding darkness. When he spotted the plane, he hesitated. I could almost see his puzzled squint. He put an arm out to stop Rochelle’s progress and Eric halted in his tracks.Messinger pushed us away from the building. “Hey, pal. Over here. Look what I got.”For a moment, the five of us formed a tableau. I felt like we were part of a pageant, some community theater group acting out a well-known scene from history. No one moved. Messinger had removed his hand from my mouth, but none of us said a word.Finally, Eric seemed to perk up. “Daddy?”“Hey, big fella. How’re you doin’? I came to pick you up.”Rochelle said, “Mark, let me have him back. I beg you. You’ve had him eight months. Let him stay with me. Please.”Despite the distance between us, the voices carried easily.“No way, babe. That’s my kid. Tell you what, though. I’ll make a deal. I get Eric. You get Kinsey. Fair enough?”Dietz glanced at Rochelle. “He won’t hurt Eric-”Rochelle lashed out at Dietz. “Shut up! This is between us.”“He’ll kill her,” Dietz said.“I don’t give a shit!” she snapped.Messinger cut in. “Excuse me, Dietz? I hate to interrupt, but you’re never going to win an argument with her. She’s a hardheaded bitch. Believe me, I know.”Dietz was silent, looking at nun. Rochelle had put her arms around Eric possessively, holding him against her, much as Messinger held me.Messinger was concentrating on Dietz for the moment. “I’d appreciate your taking your gun out, pal. Could you do that? I don’t want to have to blow this lady’s brains out quite yet. I thought you might like to say good-bye to each other first.”“How serious are you about a deal?” Dietz said.“Let’s do the gun first, okay? Then we’ll negotiate. I have to tell you I’m feeling tense. I got a. 45 with the safety off and the trigger only takes two pounds of pressure. You might want to move kind of slow.”Dietz seemed to proceed in slow motion, removing his gun from the middle-of-the-back holster he was wearing under his tweed sport coat. He held the barrel upright and removed the magazine, which he tossed out on the pavement. I could hear the metal clatter on concrete as he kicked it away. He tossed the gun over his shoulder into the dark. He held his hands up, palm out.Dietz and I exchanged a look. I could feel Messinger’s tension through the bones of my back. I was warmer, laid up against him, and if I didn’t move my head, I was hardly aware of the gun barrel. The length of it, with the suppressor attached, prevented him from pointing it, end on, at my head. He was forced to hold it at an angle. I wondered if the sheer weight of it wasn’t becoming burdensome.Messinger was apparently watching Dietz with care. “Very nice. Now why don’t you persuade Rochelle to cooperate. See if you can talk her into it because if not, I’m about to collect on this fifteen-hundred-dollar hit.”Rochelle said, “Why don’t you ask Eric what he wants to do?”Messinger’s tone was condescending. “Because he’s too young to make a decision about his own custody. Jesus Christ, Rochelle. I don’t believe some of the shit you come up with. That’s just the kind of attitude makes you a terrible parent, you know that? If he stayed with you, you’d turn him into some kind of little fruit. Now let’s cut the horseshit and make a little trade here. Just send Eric over and we’ll see what we can do.”Dietz looked at Rochelle. “Do what he says.”She said nothing. She stared at Messinger and then her gaze shifted over to me. “I don’t believe you. You’ll kill her anyway.”“No, I won’t,” he said, as if falsely accused. “That’s why I brought her out here, to trade. I’d never welsh on a deal where my kid is concerned. Are you nuts?”Dietz said to her, “You’ll have another chance to get Eric back. I promise. We’ll help you. Just do this for now.”Even at that distance, I could see her face crumple. She gave Eric a little push. “Go on...” She was starting to cry, hands shoved down in her coat pockets.Eric hesitated, looking from her face to his father’s.“It’s all right, angel,” she said. He began to walk toward us rapidly, head down, his face hidden.Messinger’s grip on me tightened and I could smell the tawny sweat of sex oozing out of his pores. Time seemed to slow as the kid crossed the pavement. All I could hear was the sound of the wind chuffing across the runway.Eric reached us. I’d never really seen him up close. His face was like a valentine, all pink cheeks, blue eyes, long lashes. So vulnerable. His ears stuck out slightly and his neck seemed too thin. “Don’t hurt her, Daddy.”“I wouldn’t do that,” Messinger said. “The car’s parked on the far side of the hangar. You can wait for me over there. Here’s the keys.”“Mark?” Rochelle’s voice sounded faint against the distant droning of an incoming plane. Tears were streaming down her face. “Can I kiss him good-bye?”I heard him mutter. “Christ.” He raised his voice. “Come ahead then, but make it quick.” To Eric, he said, “You wait here for your mommy and then you go get in the car like I said. You eat any supper?”“We stopped at McDonald’s and had a Big Mac.”“I don’t believe it. “You remember what I told you about junk food?”Eric nodded, his eyes filling with tears. It was hard to know which parent he was supposed to listen to. In the meantime, Rochelle was walking toward us along a straight line, setting her high heels down one in front of the other as if in modeling school. Over her shoulder, Dietz’s gaze locked down on mine. I thought he smiled his encouragement. I didn’t want to see Dietz die, didn’t think I could bear it, didn’t want to live myself if it came down to that.I looked at Rochelle. She’d stopped a few feet away. Eric walked over and buried his face against her. She leaned forward and laid her cheek against the top of his head. She was weeping openly. “I love you,” she whispered. “You be a good boy, okay?”He nodded mutely and then pulled away, hurrying toward the Rolls without a backward look. His father called after him.“Hey, Eric? There’s some tapes in the glove compartment. Play anything you like.”Rochelle stared at Mark. She pulled the derringer out of her pocket, aimed it straight at his head and pulled the trigger. The blast was remarkably loud for a weapon so petite. I heard his scream. He dropped the. 45 and clutched his right eye with both hands, toppling sideways onto the pavement where he lay writhing in pain. Rochelle, with an efficiency she must have learned from him, stepped in close, and fired again. “You son of a bitch. You never honored a deal in your fuckin’ life.”Messinger lay still.Dietz began to cross the tarmac, moving toward me. I went out to meet him.
