---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_012.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["raymond", "bibianna", "like", "could", "hand", "back", "car", "going", "eye", "said", "got", "head", "turned", "arm", "guy", "seemed", "get", "right", "shoulder", "first", "face", "across", "see", "mouth", "know"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/HIsforHomicideAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit012html

---


Unknown
Chapter 11WHAT HAPPENED NEXT was the result of a bureaucratic error for which responsibility was never assigned. The paperwork came down at six and Bibianna and I were mustered out. Just like that. There was no word from Dolan and Santos, no sign of the tech who was supposed to fit me with a wire. I kept waiting for the jail officer to call me back, take me aside under some pretext or other for the promised briefing. What was the deal here? Had there been a change of plans? For the life of me, I couldn’t think of a reason to delay my release. I’d just have to play the situation as it came to me. I was carrying my personal property, still sealed in the clear plastic pouch. They’d returned our shoes, belts, and other potentially death dealing items, like tampons. I was feeling vile, but the first breath of fresh air restored my good spirits to some extent. After a mere four hours in the slammer, the freedom had a giddiness attached to it.The morning was cold and foggy, the ground still saturated from the rain the night before. The scruffy hills around the jail looked serene. Little birdies sang. The passing traffic out on the freeway seemed to ebb and surge, rhythmic white noise, very restful, like the ocean at high tide. I longed for a shower, for breakfast, for privacy. I’d have to conjure up an excuse to separate from Bibianna, contact Dolan, and find out what the hell was going on. In the meantime, I was going to have to stick to her like glue.The first order of business, of course, was to find a ride home. I checked my plastic pouch, feeling like a mental patient just released from the institution. I had ten bucks in cash, which I decided to blow on a taxi. I’m too cheap for cabs as a rule, but I really felt I deserved this one. Bibianna and I clopped down the long drive that led away from the jail. I was a sight to behold, tank top and wrinkled black pants, my little white socks turning black where the dye on my wet pumps had rubbed off. Bibianna wasn’t looking all that hot herself. The red of her dress was unflattering by day, a mismatch for the spike heels, which the rain had pulled out of shape. She was applying a fresh coat of lipstick, open compact held in front of her face as she walked. She’d stripped off her panty hose, which had been riddled with runs after our adventures of the night before. Her legs looked pale and scrawny in the harsh light of day, and her dress was as pleated across the lap as the bellows of an accordion. Oh, well. I suppose there are times when you rejoice just to find yourself on the move again. Behind us were the chain-link fences, incessant lights, the locks, the barred windows. In spite of our liberation, I couldn’t think of a thing to say to her. “Thanks... it’s been fun... we’ll have to do this again sometime soon.” The simple rules of etiquette didn’t seem to apply.Bibianna tucked her compact in her purse, her manner anxious.“Did they ask you about the shooting?” I asked.“Not yet. Some homicide cop is supposed to come around to my place later today.”“What are you going to tell them?”“Who cares about that? I gotta find a way to get outta here before Raymond shows up....”I felt an anxiety of my own. What the hell was going on here? Where was Dolan? What was I supposed to do?Suddenly, Bibianna clutched my arm, digging her nails into my flesh. “Sweet Jesus,” she whispered, staring dead ahead.I followed her gaze, realizing belatedly that her attention was riveted on a dark green Ford that was parked down the road, its rear end lowered until the pan nearly scraped the ground. Her fear was so palpable that the hair rose up on the back of my neck.“Who’s that?”“It’s Raymond. Oh, God.” Her voice broke. Tears leapt to her eyes and she made a peculiar squeaking sound in her throat. I assessed the situation rapidly, without knowing quite what to do. Of all the bad luck. Apparently, Dawna had managed to put a call through to him.He’d been leaning on the front fender, watching cars pass on the frontage road. When he caught sight of us, he began to amble in our direction.“Bibianna, cool it. Just calm down. Let’s head back to the jail....”She shook her head. “Even if the cops took us home, he’d catch up eventually. Don’t leave me. Swear you won’t. Whatever happens, just go along with it. Don’t set him off or he’ll tear the place apart and you along with it.”“All right, all right. Come on now. Just be cool. I’m not going anywhere.”“Promise you won’t leave me.”“I promise,” I said.At first, I didn’t get it. At that distance, the guy looked like anybody else. He was tall and very slender, with wide shoulders and a narrow waist. From what I could see of him, he was dressed like a fashion plate: leather sport coat, pleated trousers, pointy black patent-leather shoes capped with silver at the toes, mirrored sunglasses. He could have been Latino or Italian, dark hair and olive skin. I placed him in his early thirties. He had his hands in his pockets and his manner seemed relaxed.Bibianna’s fingers were ice cold. She clung to my hand the way a friend might in the middle of a horror movie just before the guy with the butcher knife leaps out. I couldn’t see anything in his appearance that would warrant her response.When he reached us, he took his sunglasses off. He had dark thick lashes, a full mouth, a dimple in his chin. Once he was in close range, I realized there was something wrong. His eyes had rolled back in his head, leaving narrow slits of white along the lower rims. His face and body underwent a series of convulsive movements; he blinked his eyes, the comer of his mouth jumped involuntarily, his lips opened wide, then his head jerked back twice. The effect was weird-a sequence of behaviors that set his whole body in motion, culminating in a sound that was half shout, half cough. He moved his right arm, rolling it in its socket as if to loosen tension. In memory, a buzzer sounded dimly, and I recalled the existence of some medical condition that produced just this effect-tics and shouts. He made no reference to it, nor did Bibianna, who seemed more concerned about his reaction to Chago’s death.“I didn’t do it. I swear to God. I didn’t kill him. I’m sorry. It was an accident. Oh, please. Raymond, I didn’t have anything to do with it....”His expression had softened, becoming nearly wistful as he took her by the shoulders and pulled her in close to him, rubbing his hands up and down her bare arms. “You don’t know how happy I am to see you....”I could see her tense up, holding herself away from him slightly, though she couldn’t do much without perhaps risking some kind of outburst. He began to nuzzle her hair. “Oh, baby. Angel. Sweet thing, I’m glad to see you,” he murmured, his voice soft. “This is beautiful. I really missed you, you know that?” He drew back from her then, clamping his fingers around her jaw so that she was forced to look at him. “Hey, it’s all right. Everything’s okay. Don’t worry.” His gaze moved across to me. “Who is this?” His head jerked twice.“Hannah Moore,” I said.She flicked a look at him. “This is Raymond Maldonado.”He held his hand out. “Nice to meet you. Sorry about all this. My brother was killed last night.”We shook hands. His were warm and soft, his grip firm.“I’m sorry about your brother. That’s terrible,” The pleasantries created an air of unreality.Raymond glanced at Bibianna. “You ready?”“I’m not going. Raymond, I mean it. I’m done with all that. I don’t want to go back to Los Angeles. I told you. I didn’t have anything to do with...” He took her arm and began to walk her toward the car. I could see her mouth twist and his fingers dug into her elbow painfully. She babbled on. He raised a hand as if to silence her, warding off the spill of words. She pressed a hand to her lips. He turned his head to one side. He hunched a shoulder, did a neck roll, and took a deep breath, eyes sliding up in his head. His face jerked to the right, once, twice. His eyes came open, the irises sliding into view-large, dark brown, and clear. He continued toward the car.I followed without invitation, calculating rapidly. Here was my quarry, Raymond Maldonado in the flesh. I knew I was being offered the perfect opportunity, but I’d had no prep time. If I went in without a briefing, I could blow the whole operation. I couldn’t afford to start playing undercover cop, but what choice did I have? He was walking so rapidly, I had to do a quickstep to keep up.Bibianna was getting into passive resistance, slowing down, hanging back. “Listen, Raymond. Maybe I could go another time, okay? Hannah’s been talking about going home with me,” she said. “And we do have plans....”He turned and smiled at me. “We’re getting married.”“Today?”He shook his head. “Soon, though. It was all set up, but she said she wasn’t ready. Next thing I know she takes off. Just like that, she’s gone. Doesn’t even leave me a note. I wake up one morning and she’s disappeared....”Bibianna’s face was drawn and pale. “I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to hurt you, Raymond, but what could I do? What was I going to say to you? I tried to tell you....”He raised a finger to his lips and then he pointed it at her reprovingly. “You don’t leave a guy, Bibianna.” He turned to me, one hand out, palm up, arguing his case. “I’ve been in love with this woman for how many years now? Six? Eight? What am I going to do with her, huh?”Bibianna was silent, her eyes full of dread. I couldn’t believe the change that had come over her. All the confidence was gone, the high energy, the sexiness. My own mouth was getting dry, and a whisper of fear tickled me in the small of the back.We reached the car. Another fellow stepped out, a Latino with a dark knit watch cap pulled down to his ears. His eyes were black, as flat and dull as spots of old paint. He had acne scars on his cheeks and a mustache made up of about fourteen hairs, some of which looked like they were drawn on by hand. He was my size. He wore sharply pressed khaki pants with numerous pleats across the front and an immaculate white undershirt. Tufts of underarm hair were visible, straight and dark. His bare arms were muscular, tattoos extending from his shoulders to his wrists-a graphic rendition of Donald Duck on his right and Daffy Duck on his left.“That’s a copyright violation,” I remarked, nearly giddy with anxiety.“That’s Luis,” Raymond said.He had a gun. He held the rear car door open, like a well-mannered chauffeur.Bibianna balked, one arm braced against the car. “I’m not going without Hannah.”Raymond seemed taken aback. “Why not?”“She’s my friend and I want her with me,” she said.“I don’t even know this girl,” he said.Bibianna’s eyes flashed. “Goddamn it! This is just like you, Raymond. You say you love me. You say you’ll do anything. First thing I ask for, all I get is an argument. Well, I’m sick of it!”“Okay, okay. She can go if she wants. Anything you say.”Bibianna turned to me with a look filled with mute pleading. “Please. Just for a few days.”I felt myself shrug. “I got nothing else to do,” I said.Bibianna got in first, sliding across the backseat. Raymond slid in beside her. I hesitated briefly, wondering at the wisdom of it.Luis turned the gun so that it was pointing at my chest. It clarified my thinking most emphatically.I got into the backseat. The dashboard was covered in white terrycloth with “Raymond and Bibianna” machine-stitched in glossy green script across the face of it. A rosary hung from the rearview mirror along with a Sacred Heart of Jesus, bleeding. The interior of the car, including front and back seats, was upholstered in white acrylic teddy bear fur. There was a Radio Shack car phone on the front seat. All the car lacked was a collection of bobbleheads on the rear... or a four-inch Virgin Mary with little magnetized feet. The minute I got in, I knew I’d made a mistake.Luis started the engine without a word. The mufflers sounded like distant jackhammers as he pulled out onto the road. He kept both hands on the steering wheel with his arms fully extended, his trunk and head inclined back. He made a U-turn and sped toward the freeway. Raymond’s ticcing recurred at perhaps three-minute intervals, sometimes less. I found myself unnerved at first, especially in the absence of any explanation. The others seemed to take it for granted. At first, I would jump every time he did it, but I found myself adjusting, marveling that anybody had to live like that. Was there no help for him?Bibianna now seemed to be in the mood for an argument, maybe to forestall any amorous intentions. “How’d you find out about last night?”“Dawna called and told me some of it before the cops picked her up. Who’s the guy?”“What guy?”“The guy last night shot Chago.”“How do I know who he was? Just somebody in the restaurant with a gun.”“Dawna said you were with him.”“I was there by myself.”“Not what she says.”“She said that? It’s bullshit. What’d he look like? She tell you that?”“She didn’t have a chance. Squad car pulled up and she hung up. Said some chick was there, too.”“She’s blowin’ smoke up your skirt. What a bitch! I was there by myself when Chago showed up with a gun. Maybe the guy was an off-duty cop or just your average citizen with a gun.”Raymond’s face darkened. “That would really piss me off. What’s the matter with people? Too many fuckin’ handguns around.” He turned and looked at me. “Every day in the paper, somebody gets blown away. L. A. Times. You read Metro? Scares the shit out of me.” He held a hand up, blocking words in. “You know that slogan says, ‘Guns don’t kill people. People kill people.’? What a crock that is.”“Luis has a gun,” I remarked helpfully.“That’s different. He’s a lieutenant. He’s like a bodyguard to me. I can’t believe some joker in a restaurant shoots my brother for no fuckin’ reason.”All the little birdies had flown out of this man’s tree. I sat with my eyes straight ahead and my mouth shut, remembering what Bibianna had told me about his temper.Raymond turned to Bibianna and started kissing her, his hands moving across her breasts with an intimacy I found embarrassing. She was compliant, but she rolled an eye at me frantically across his shoulder. I looked out the window.I leaned forward and tapped Luis on the shoulder, trying the only Spanish phrase I’m familiar with. “Uh, habla usted ingles?”“Shit, lady. What do I look like, a retard?” he said. His English wasn’t even spoken with an accent, and I had to wonder if the gangbanger outfit was an affectation.“Oh. Well, could you pull over at this next corner and let me the fuck out? I gotta make a quick phone call.”This did not produce the desired results.I kept my tone conversational as I turned to Raymond, placing my mouth up close to his ear. “Excuse me, Raymond. Could you have the guy let me out up here?”Raymond had run his hand up under Bibianna’s skirt, pushing the fabric back, running a finger under the rim of her underpants. There was nothing remotely sexual about it. He was claiming his rights. I could hear her murmuring, “Fantastic... oh, baby, that’s great,” anything to appease and placate his neediness. The driver caught my eye in the rearview mirror and winked at me conspiratorially. He flipped on the car radio to mask the escalating sounds. Salsa music filled the car. This was repellent.I was fully prepared to fling myself out, risking concussion and broken bones, just to escape from this brothel of faux fur and religious artifacts. I waited until the car slowed as we approached the on ramp to the freeway, then I slid my hand under the door handle and gave it a yank. Nothing happened. Both of the window cranks had been removed in the rear. I leaned my forehead against the tinted glass, staring out the window. Behind me, I could hear Raymond fumble with his belt buckle and the zipper to his pants. This was worse than an X-rated video. I turned and stared at them.“God, Bibianna,” I said loudly. “How rude! How do you think I feel sitting here while you screw some stud! Why don’t you keep your hands to yourself, okay?”Raymond turned a sex-groggy face toward me, his eyes at half-mast. His mouth seemed gorged, his chin laved in lipstick, his hair standing straight up. The whole car smelled like hormones, sex juice, and underpants. Luis, all a smirk, tried to peer into the backseat through the rearview mirror.I turned on him savagely. “Hey, Jack. What are you lookin’ at?” And then to Raymond. “I’m sorry, Raymond. I know it’s not your fault how these people act.”Bibianna pushed herself into an upright position, doing what she could to pull her skirt back into place. She murmured, “Sorry.” She had a big hickey on her neck where Raymond had been slurping away on her.Raymond actually seemed embarrassed, tucking in his shirt. He went through a sequence of behaviors that included the head jerking and the neck rolls.I plowed right on. “I told her I got a steady boyfriend in the slammer,” I said to him. “The last thing I need is watching you two get it on. God. She’s got no class.” I sat back in the seat, brushing imaginary lint off my black pants.Raymond pulled out a handkerchief and wiped some of Bibianna’s lipstick off his chin. His smile was sheepish. “Take it easy. It’s not her fault. She can’t help it,” he said.“Well, I get sick of hearing her brag about you. Why can’t she keep her opinions to herself?”“She brags about me?”“No, Raymond. I’m just saying that to hear myself talk,” I said. “I don’t suppose I could trouble anybody for some grub. We haven’t had breakfast and I’m starving to death.”Raymond leaned forward and gave Luis a thump on the head. “What’s the matter with you? Pull off here. Didn’t you hear what the lady said?”Raymond studied me with amusement, talking to Bibianna over his shoulder. “I like your friend, here. She’s got some spunk.”“This isn’t spunk, Raymond. This is irritation,” I said. Bibianna eyed me uneasily, but I was really on a roll. I was making up Hannah’s character as I went along, and it was liberating as hell. She was short-tempered, sarcastic, outspoken, and crude. I could get used to this. License to misbehave.Raymond smiled at me.“This okay, boss?” Luis, of the handsomely tattooed arms, was slowing near the entrance to a McDonald’s on upper State Street.“This okay with you?” Raymond said to me. He seemed genuinely concerned that the restaurant meet with my approval.“Raymond, this is perfect. Way to go.”I ate three Egg McMuffins. If it had been 10:00 A.M., I’d have had a couple of Qp’s with cheese instead. Bibianna couldn’t eat. She sat and picked at an apple Danish while Luis and Raymond, with a flair for the Gallic, ordered French toast and French fries, with a side of maple syrup. I had spotted a telephone in the narrow corridor leading to the ladies’ room, but the wall-mounted instrument was in plain view of the table where the four of us sat. Raymond kept his arm loosely draped around Bibianna’s shoulders, rubbing her upper arm in a manner meant to be sexy. Guys learn to do that in high school and it’s very irritating. She was back to being passive, obsequious, and subdued. I wanted to see her sass him. Resist. I wanted her to thumb her nose at him. It was not going to help her to act like a whipped dog. It was time she stood up for herself again. If she acted like a victim, the guy was going to treat her like one.I got up from the table. “I gotta go to the can. Come with me, Bibianna. You can rat my hair.”“I’m fine.”“Well, I’m not. Could you pardon us, Raymond? We have to go do some girl stuff.”“Have at it,” he said.I kissed my fingertip and placed it on the tip of his nose. “You’re a peach.”He slid out of the booth so Bibianna could get up.
