---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_009.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["bibianna", "car", "officer", "could", "like", "one", "cop", "going", "get", "janofsky", "face", "said", "see", "two", "look", "hand", "head", "back", "around", "guy", "kill", "got", "away", "turned", "door"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/HIsforHomicideAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit009html

---


Unknown
Chapter 8I CROSSED TO the Ford. The left rear door was open and Bibianna sat sideways in the backseat, leaning forward with her elbows on her knees. She was shaking so hard that she couldn’t keep her feet flat on the pavement. Her spike heels seemed to do a little tap dance as she pressed her hands together and clamped them between her thighs. I thought she was humming, but it was a moan she was trying to suppress through tightly clamped teeth. Her face was starchy white. I hunkered beside her, placing one hand on the icy skin of her arm. “You okay?”She shook her head, a hopeless gesture of terror and resignation. “I’m dead meat. I’m dead. This is my fault. There’s going to be hell to pay.” Her gaze strayed vaguely toward the street corner, where a crowd had gathered. Tears rose in her eyes, not from sorrow as much as from desperation.I gave her arm a shake. “Who is that?”“His name is Chago. He’s the brother of this guy I was living with before I came up here. He said Raymond sent him up here to bring me back.”“Bullshit, Bibianna. They weren’t going to take you anyplace. They were going to kill you.”“I wish I could have gotten it over with. If anything happens to Chago, Raymond’s going to kill me anyway. He’ll have to. Like a blood debt. My life’s not worth shit.”“I thought Jimmy was the one who shot him. Why is it your fault?”“What difference does it make? Raymond doesn’t care about that. It’s my fault I left. It’s my fault he had to send Chago up here. It’s my fault the car got wrecked. That’s how he sees things.”“I take it the blonde was Chago’s girlfriend,” I said.“His wife. Her name’s Dawna. D-a-w-n-a. Do you love that? Shit, she’ll kill me herself if Raymond doesn’t kill me first.”Jimmy Tate approached and put his hand on the back of Bibianna’s neck. “Hey, babe. How are you?”She took his hand and pressed it against her cheek. “Oh, God, oh, God... I was scared for you.”He pulled her to her feet and took her in his arms, enfolding her, murmuring against her hair.“Jesus, what am I going to do?” she wailed.An emergency vehicle came barreling around the corner, orange light flashing as the siren ground abruptly to a halt. Two paramedics got out, one of them toting a first-aid kit. I rose to my feet, watching over the hood of the Ford as the two of them crossed rapidly to the guy, who was lying facedown on the sidewalk. His lurching journey to the corner had come to a sudden halt. I noticed he’d left a long, smeared trail of blood in his wake like a snail. The woman who knelt beside him was crying uncontrollably. I was certain she was a stranger, only connected to him by the quirk of fate that had placed her at the scene. Her two companions tried to coax her away, but she refused to relinquish her hold.One of the paramedics knelt and placed his fingers against the guy’s carotid artery, trying to get a pulse. He and the other paramedic exchanged one of those looks that in a television episode replaces six lines of dialogue. Two squad cars swung into view, tires squealing, and pulled up behind the emergency vehicle. A uniformed patrolman got out of the first car and Jimmy Tate walked over to meet him. The beat officer in the second turned out to be a woman, tall, sturdily constructed, her pale hair skinned away from her face and secured in a small, neat knot at the back of her neck. She was hatless, in dark regulation pants and a dark jacket with Santa Teresa Police Department patches on the sleeves. She crossed to the paramedics and had a quick conversation. I noticed that none of them jumped into any emergency procedures, which suggested the guy in the sport coat had already departed this life. The beat officer moved back to her patrol car and radioed the dispatcher, asking for someone from the coroner’s office, the CSI unit, and backup on a Code 2-no sirens. She was going to need help securing the crime scene. The rain had begun again, drizzle lending the night air a softening haze. The crowd was subdued and there was no suggestion of interference, but someone was going to have to begin interviewing witnesses, collecting names and addresses, before people got restless and started leaving the area.Bibianna slumped back into the backseat of the car again. Long minutes passed. Bibianna had lapsed into silence, but when the first backup unit arrived, she stirred, shooting a dark look in the direction of the two officers emerging from the black-and-white. “I don’t want to talk to any cops,” she said. “I hate cops. I don’t want to talk to them.”“Bibianna, you’re going to have to talk to them. Those people tried to kill you. There’s a dead man on the sidewalk....”Fury flashed across her face and her voice rose several notches. “Just leave me alone!”Several people turned to look at us, including the beat officer, who began to walk in our direction. She put a hand on her left hip, touching her nightstick like a talisman. As she approached, I checked the name on her tag. Officer D. Janofsky. Probably Diane or Deborah. She didn’t look like a Dorothy. Up close, I could see that she was in her late twenties, probably new to the department. I knew most of the officers who worked in this area, but she was not one I’d met. Her manner was cautious, her expression alert. Like many cops, she’d learned to disconnect her emotions. “Everything okay here?”She scarcely had the words out when a third patrol car skidded around the corner. All three of us turned as the car came to a halt some distance away. Tuesday night in Santa Teresa is usually very quiet, so aside from the obvious desire to assist a fellow officer, the officer responding must have been thrilled to see some action. This was better than rousting the homeless down at the railroad tracks. Janofsky turned her attention to Bibianna, whose face had darkened. I was keeping tabs on Tate out of the corner of my eye, and I realized, as had Bibianna, that he had been taken into custody.“Keep her away from me,” Bibianna said.“We’re fine,” I said, hoping to defuse the situation.Janofsky ignored me, fixing Bibianna with a testy look. “I’d like to see your driver’s license.” She reached for her flashlight as if she meant to examine the license once Bibianna had produced it. I knew from experience a flashlight that size could serve as a powerful protective weapon. I watched apprehensively.“What for?” Bibianna asked.“Ma’am, could you show me some identification?”“Fuck you,” Bibianna said. She managed to infuse the two words with maximum boredom and maximum contempt. Why was she being so belligerent? I could feel my own temper climb and I knew the policewoman was close to blowing. This was no time to fool around. For all Janofsky knew, Bibianna had shot the man herself.“Her name is Diaz,” I interjected. “She’s upset about the shooting. Can I answer any questions for you? My name’s Hannah Moore.” I was babbling like an idiot, trying to offset some of the tension in the air. The patrol car with Tate in it pulled away from the curb, easing through the crowd of curiosity seekers that was milling about.Bibianna turned on me. “Keep out of this. Where are they taking Tate?”“Probably to the station. He’ll be fine. Don’t worry about it. Just cool it. You’ve already got enough trouble on your hands.”“Could you get out of the car, please?” the officer said. She backed up half a step and planted her feet.I said, “Goddamn it, Bibianna. Would you just do what the lady says? You’ve got your tit in a wringer. Don’t you get that?”Bibianna bolted from the car abruptly and gave me a shove that nearly knocked me over backward. I caught myself on the open car door, grabbing at the handle to retain my balance. Bibianna drove a shoulder into Officer Janofsky, catching her off-guard. Janofsky barked out an expletive, startled by the assault. Bibianna punched her in the face, swung around, and punched at me, too, grazing my temple with a fist the size and shape of a broken rock. That sucker hurt. For someone so petite, she really managed to pack a wallop.Officer Janofsky went into combat mode. Before the other two officers even understood what was going on, she slammed Bibianna up against the car, grabbing one wrist in the process. Cops know how to pinch little hurt places on the human body that’ll drop you in your tracks. I saw Bibianna stiffen and her face twist with pain as a pertinent nerve was tweaked beyond endurance. Janofsky jerked Bibianna’s arms back and snapped a set of cuffs on her. I felt my heart sink. They’d march her off to jail and keep her there for life. I could see, in a flash, that if I wanted to maintain our connection, I only had one choice here. I grabbed Officer Janofsky by the arm. “Hey, get off her. You can’t treat her that way!”Janofsky leveled me with a look. She was trembling with rage, in no mood to take any sass from the likes of me. “Back up!” she snapped.“You back up!” I snapped back. Out of the comer of my eye, I could see two male cops coming up on my right. Here goes “assault on a police officer,” I thought. I hauled off and socked Officer Janofsky in the face. The next thing I knew, I was flat on the pavement, my wrists handcuffed behind me, the right side of my face being ground into the concrete. Some cop had his knee in the middle of my back. I could hardly breathe, and for a moment I worried he’d crush my rib cage. It hurt like hell, but I couldn’t even get out a “guff” of protest. I’d been effectively incapacitated, not in pain, but certainly penitent. Having made his point, the guy got up. I stayed where I was, reluctant to risk a crack in the head with a nightstick. As an addendum to my discomfort, the drizzle was suddenly upgraded to a dainty pitter-patter. I groaned involuntarily. I heard Bibianna shriek, a sound more related to outrage than pain. I inched up my head in time to see her kick Janofsky in the kneecap. The officer’s adrenaline was already up and I was afraid she’d go after Bibianna with the flashlight. She grabbed her by the throat, trying to get a choke hold. One of Janofsky’s fellow officers intervened at that point, which was fortunate. I laid my cheek down against the pavement, waiting for the melodrama to play itself out. The raindrops, as they hit the sidewalk, rebounded in my face. I stared at the tiny pebbles embedded in the concrete, using auditory cues to re-create the activities taking place around me. It was like listening to a sporting event on the radio. I grew weary trying to visualize the play as it progressed. Drops of water began to slide down the side of my face, collecting on the pavement in a shallow pool near my cheek. I felt like one of those protesters whose pictures you see in the paper. I craned my head around, resting my chin on the walk.“Uh, excuse me,” I said. “Hey!” It was a strain to try to hold my head in that position, so I laid it down again. Several pairs of regulation cop shoes appeared in my line of vision. I hoped none of them belonged to Lieutenant Dolan. Somebody gave an order. Suddenly, there was an officer on either side of me. I felt myself hooked under the armpits and I was lifted to my feet, levitating into an upright position effortlessly. After a quick pat-down, I was hustled off to a squad car and shoved into the backseat. The door was slammed shut.An unmarked car came down the street from the opposite direction, sliding to a halt on the rain-lubricated asphalt. I saw Bill Blair, the coroner’s deputy, get out on the driver’s side, taking a moment to shrug himself into his raincoat. Head bowed against the rain, he moved over to the body without looking in my direction. All the various crime scene personnel had begun to assemble: two guys from the Public Works Department setting up barricades, running tape around the perimeter, the CSI unit, along with the supervisor in a separate vehicle. As in the early moments of a play, the actors were appearing on stage, each with the necessary props, each with a bit of business to perform. Little by little, the drama of homicide was being played out again.I sat forward slightly, peering through the metal screen that separated the front of the squad car from the rear. It was 1:17 A.M. and my head had begun to ache. The rain now formed a hazy curtain that seemed to blow against the streetlights, sending up whiffs of steam. The sound was homely, like uncooked rice grains falling on a cookie sheet. Within minutes, the precipitation increased rapidly to a steady drumming on the roof of the black-and-white. Ordinarily, I like sitting in a parked car in a downpour. It seems cozy and safe and surprisingly intimate, depending on the circumstances, of course. The same smattering of people stood outside on the darkened street, avoiding the sight of me as if I were leprous. Anyone sitting in the rear of a cop car looks guilty somehow. The emergency vehicle had been moved to one side to allow the coroner’s deputy access to the body. Chago had been covered with a length of yellow plastic to shield him from the rain. Blood had coagulated on the sidewalk like a sticky patch of motor oil, and I could still smell cordite. The police radio was squawking incomprehensibly. There was a time in my life-during my days in uniform-when I understood every word. Not so, tonight. I’d lost my ear for it, like a foreign language I no longer had a use for.Bibianna was being questioned by the police inspector, who’d appeared at some point. She was being pelted by the rain, the red dress clinging to her stained to a dark bloody hue. She looked like she was complaining, though I couldn’t hear a word she said. Judging from the inspector’s expression and the set of Bibianna’s shoulders, she was subdued, but uncooperative. The inspector waved a hand at her impatiently. The same officer who’d ushered me to the patrol car steered Bibianna in my direction. She was frisked for weapons, a ludicrous formality under the circumstances. In the little mini she was wearing, what kind of weapon could she possibly conceal? The rear door of the squad car was yanked open and the officer pushed her head down and shoved her into the backseat beside me. She’d recovered some of her energy, jaws snapping at the guy’s hand like a rabid dog. “Get your fuckin’ hands off me, you cock-sucker!” she screamed.Nice talk, huh? When you get arrested, these are the kind of people you’re forced to associate with. Because of the handcuffs, her arms were pinioned awkwardly behind her, which meant she ended up lying halfway across my lap. Before the officer could close the door, she lashed a kick at him with one of her spike heels. He was lucky she missed. She’d have torn a hunk of flesh out of his thigh if she’d caught him right. He was amazingly polite-probably heartened by the fact that he could look up her dress-but I noticed he managed to get the door shut before she could kick at him again. She was a firecracker, absolutely fearless. For a minute, I thought she’d lie there and kick the windows out. She muttered something to herself and straightened up.She flicked her hair away from her face with a shake of her head. A few drops of water flew off on me. “Did you see that? I could have been killed tonight! Those assholes tried to kill me!” She was referring to the cops, not Chago and the blonde.“The cops didn’t try to kill you,” I said irritably. “What did you expect? You haul off and sock a cop, what’d you think was going to happen?”“Look who’s talking. You hit that bitch twice as hard as me.” She turned a calculating look on me and I could see now that I had garnered a spark of admiration for my pugilistic skills. She began a staring contest with one of the cops standing near the car. “God, I hate pigs,” she remarked.“They don’t seem all that fond of you,” I said.“I mean it! I could sue. That’s police brutality.”“What’s your problem?”“Forget it. It’s none of your business.”She peered out of the car window and I followed her gaze. Two cops were conferring, probably in preparation for removing us to the station. I wished they’d get on with it. I was cold. My tank top was soaked and my pants were soggy, clinging to my thighs like a lapful of wet sheets. I wasn’t sure what had happened to my leather jacket. Somebody would steal it if I’d left it in the restaurant. Both my scruffy pumps and little white socks were mud-spattered and made squishing sounds every time I moved my feet. I could still smell the sooty cologne of secondhand cigarette smoke that permeated my hair. With my hands cuffed from behind, I had metal bracelets digging into the bruised flesh of my wrists.Bibianna’s mood underwent a shift. Her manner now seemed completely matter-of-fact, as if shoot-outs, death, and resisting arrest were an everyday occurrence. She held a foot up, inspecting her shoe. “Fuckin’ shoes are ruined,” she remarked. “That’s the trouble with suede. One wet night and you’re wearing slime. I wish I had a cigarette. You think they’re going to bring my bag?”“You better hope not. I thought you had a joint in there.”That warranted a half laugh. “Oh, yeah. I forgot. That’s how my luck runs, you know? What’s the point trying to straighten out your life if it’s all going to turn to worms again?”She peered out at the various law enforcement types milling around in the rain. “Hey! Let’s pick up the pace, frog-lips. What’s the delay?” It was pointless yelling with the windows rolled up. One of the beat cops turned and looked at her, but I was sure he hadn’t heard a word she’d said. “Pig,” she said to him pleasantly. “Yeah, you, dick-head. Get an eyeful.” She stuck a leg up in the air. He looked away and Bibianna laughed.
