---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_003.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["claim", "office", "way", "titus", "little", "door", "like", "time", "thing", "one", "said", "still", "go", "let", "could", "see", "car", "gordon", "insurance", "u", "month", "light", "vera", "mary", "turned"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/HIsforHomicideAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit003html

---


Unknown
Chapter 2CF HAD BEEN buzzing about Gordon Titus since June when the quarterly report showed unusual claim activity. In an insurance office, any time the loss ratio exceeds the profit ratio by ten percent, the board begins to scrutinize the entire operation, trying to decide where the trouble lies. The fact that ours was the California Fidelity home office didn’t exempt us from corporate abuse, and the general feeling was that we were headed for a shake-up. Word had it that Gordon Titus had been hired by the Palm Springs branch originally to revise their office procedures and boost their premium volume commitment. While he’d apparently done an admirable job (from the board’s point of view), he’d created a lot of misery. In a world presided over by Agatha Christie, Gordon Titus might have ended up on the conference room floor with a paper spindle through his heart. In the real world, such matters seldom have such a satisfactory ending. Gordon Titus was simply being transferred to Santa Teresa, where he was destined to create the same kind of misery.In theory, this had little or nothing to do with me. My office space is provided by CF, in exchange for which I do routine investigations for them three or four times a month, checking out arson and wrongful death claims, among other things. On a quarterly basis, I put together documentation on any suspect claim being forwarded to the Insurance Crime Prevention Institute for investigation. I was currently pursuing fourteen such claims. Insurance fraud is big business, amounting to millions of dollars a year in losses that are passed on to honest policy holders, assuming there are still a few of us left out here. It’s been my observation, after years in the business, that a certain percent of the population simply can’t resist the urge to cheat. This inclination seems to cut across all class and economic lines, uniting racial and ethnic groups who otherwise might have little to say to one another. Insurance is regarded as equivalent to the state lottery. In return for a couple of months’ premiums, people expect to hit the jackpot. Some are even willing to tamper with the odds to assure themselves of a payoff. I’ve seen people falsify losses on burglary claims, indicating goods stolen that were never, in fact, in their possession. I’ve seen buildings burned down, medical claims inflated, wounds self-inflicted, workmen’s compensation claims extended far beyond any actual disability. I’ve seen declarations of property damage, lost earnings, accidents, and personal injuries that occurred only in the inflamed imaginations of the claimants. Happily, insurance companies have been wising up fast and have now instituted measures for sniffing out deceit. Part of my job entails laying the foundation for prosecution of these fraudulent claims. With Gordon Titus due to arrive any day, there’d been a sudden flurry of cases thrown in my direction and I was under pressure to produce quick results.Vera passed along the latest of these questionable claims on a Sunday afternoon in late October. I had stopped by the office to pick up some estimated income tax files that had to go to my accountant first thing Monday morning. I parked my VW in the back lot as usual, entering the building by way of the rear stairs. I passed the darkened CF offices, let myself into my office, where I checked my answering machine for messages, did a quick sorting of Saturday’s mail, and tucked the tax forms in the outside pouch of my leather shoulder bag. As I passed the CF offices on my way out again, I noticed there were lights on. I paused to peer through the glass doors, wondering if a thief was making off with all the office equipment. Vera crossed my line of vision, papers in hand, apparently on her way to the copy machine. She caught sight of me and waved, veering in my direction. She’s thirty-eight, single, and the closest thing to a “best” friend I’m likely to have. The cluster of office keys was still in the lock and they jingled and clanked as she opened the door. “Hey, babe. I was looking for you Friday afternoon, but you’d already left. Must be nice knocking off at two,” she said as she let me in.“Where did you come from? The place was dark when I passed by a minute ago.”She relocked the door and continued toward the copier with me trailing along behind. She was talking over her shoulder, her manner relaxed. “I just popped by to use the Xerox machine. Don’t tell anyone. This is personal business. A list of guests for the reception.” She raised the lid on the Xerox machine and placed a paper on the glass, punching in instructions. She pressed the “print” button and the machine fired up. She was wearing black tights and knee-high boots with an oversize sweat shirt that hit her just below the crotch. She caught my look. “I know. It looks like I forgot to put on my pants. I’m on my way to Neil’s, but I wanted to grab this while I could. What are you up to? You want to join us for a drink?”“Thanks, but I better not. I have some work to do.”“Well, you missed the big excitement. The legendary Mr. Titus showed up Friday afternoon with three of his own hand-picked lieutenants. Two reps and a claims adjuster got canned to make room for them.”“You’re kidding! Who?”“Tony Marsden, Jack Cantheas, and Letty Bing.”“Letty? She’ll sue!”“I sincerely hope so.”“I thought he wasn’t due here for another three weeks.”“Surprise, surprise. I’ll probably be fired next.”“Oh, come on. You’re doing a great job.”“Yeah, right. That’s why claims posted six hundred thousand in losses.”“That was Andy Motycka’s fault, not yours.”“Oh, who cares? I’m getting married. I can do something else. I never liked the job that much anyway. How’s goes the shopping so far?”“The shopping?” I said blankly. I was still trying to cope with the disaster at CF.“For the wedding. A dress.”“Oooh. For the wedding. I’ve got a dress.”“Bullshit. You only own one dress and it’s black. You’re the maid of honor, not a pallbearer.” Vera and her beloved were getting married in eight days, on Halloween. Everyone had given her infinite grief over her choice of dates, but Vera was adamant, claiming her natural cynicism was at war with sentiment. She’d never thought to marry. She’d been dating (she said) since she was twelve years old and had gone through countless men. Despite the fact that she was absolutely nuts about her fiancee, she was determined to turn tradition on its ear. I thought a black dress would be perfect for Halloween nuptials. Once the reception was over we could go trick-or-treating together and maybe pool the take. I wanted dibs on the Hershey’s Kisses and Tootsie Rolls.“Besides, you’ve had that damn dress for five years,” she went on.“Six.”“And last time you wore it you said it still smelled like a swamp.”“I washed it!”“Kinsey, you cannot wear a six-year-old smelly black dress in my wedding. You swore you’d get a new one.”“I will.”She gave me a flat look, filled with skepticism. “Where will you go to shop? Not K Mart.”“I wouldn’t go to K Mart. I can’t believe you said that.”“Well, where?”I looked at her uneasily, trying to come up with an answer that would satisfy. I knew the hesitation was just an invitation for her to step in and boss me around, but to tell you the truth, I hadn’t the faintest idea what kind of dress to buy. I’ve never been a maid of honor. I don’t have a clue what such maidens wear. Something useless, I’m sure, with big flounces everywhere.She stepped in. “I will help you,” she said, as though to a half-wit.“You will? That’s great.”Vera rolled her eyes, but I could tell she was thrilled that I was yielding control. People like to take charge of my personal life. Many seem to feel I don’t do things right. “Friday. After work,” she said.“Thanks. We can have dinner afterward. My treat.”“I don’t want a Quarter Pounder with cheese,” she said.I waved at her dismissively and headed toward the door. “See you in the morning. You want to let me out?”“Hang on a minute and I’ll go, too. Why don’t you go ahead and pick up the case I tried to give you Friday. It’s in the file in my out box. The woman’s name is Bibianna Diaz. If you can nail her, maybe all of us will end up looking good.”I detoured into the glass cubicle she now occupied as claims manager, spotting the Diaz file, which was right on top. “Got it,” I called.“You can talk to Mary Bellflower once you’ve had a chance to review it. It was Parnel’s to begin with, but she’s the one who flagged it.”“I thought the cops took all his files.”“This wasn’t in with the files on his desk. He’d given it to Mary the month before, so the cops never saw it.” She emerged with her photocopies clamped between her teeth while she fished out her car keys.“I’ll see if there’s a way to check the woman out before I talk to Mary. At least I can get the lay of the land that way first,” I said.“Suit yourself. You can work it out any way you want.” Vera flipped the lights off and let us out of the office, locking the doors behind her. “If you have any questions, I’ll be home by ten.”We left the building together, chatting idly as we trotted down the stairs. Ours were the only two cars in the lot, parked side by side. “One more thing,” she said as she unlocked her car door. “Titus has asked to see you first thing tomorrow morning.”I stared at her across the top of her car. “Why me? I don’t work for him.”“Who knows? Maybe he sees you as an ‘important part of the team.’ He talks like that. All this rah-rah horse-puckey. It’s obnoxious.” She opened the door and slid into the driver’s seat, rolling the window down on the passenger side. “Take care.”“You too.”I let myself into my car, my stomach already churning. I didn’t want to see Gordon Titus at all, let alone tomorrow morning. What a way to start the week....The parking lot was empty and the downtown was quiet. We pulled out at the same time, turning in opposite directions. All the stores were closed, but the lights along State Street and the smattering of pedestrians gave the illusion of activity in the otherwise deserted business district. Santa Teresa is a town where you can still window-shop after hours without (too much) fear of attack. During tourist season the streets swarm with people, and even in the off months there’s a benign air about the place. I was tempted to grab some supper in one of the little restaurants in the area, but I could hear a peanut-butter-and-pickle sandwich calling me from home.The neighborhood was fully dark by the time I parked the car and entered my gate. Henry’s kitchen light was on, but I resisted the temptation to pop in to see him. He’d want to feed me dinner, ply me with decent Chardonnay, and catch me up on all the latest gossip. At the age of eighty-two, he’s a retired commercial baker, involved now in catering tea parties for little old ladies on our block. As a sideline, he writes those little crossword puzzle booklets you see in supermarket checkout lines, filled with puns, bons mots, and spoonerisms. When he’s not doing that, he’s usually chiding me about my personal life, which he thinks is not only dangerous, but much too uncivilized.I let myself into my apartment and flipped on one of the table lamps. I dropped my handbag on the counter that separates my kitchenette from the designated living room. The place had been completely redone after a bomb blast had flattened it. I’d stayed with Henry until the construction was finished, moving back into the apartment on my birthday the previous May. And what a gift it was, like a pirate ship, all teak and brass fittings, a porthole in the door, a spiral staircase leading up to a loft where I could sleep now beneath a skylight salted with stars. My bed was a platform with drawers built into the base. Downstairs, I had a galley for a kitchen, an alcove for a stacking washer/dryer, a living room with a sofa that doubled for company, and a small guest bath. Upstairs, a second bathroom had a sunken tub with a jungle of houseplants on the windowsill and a glimpse of the ocean through the treetops.The entire apartment was fitted with little nooks and crannies of storage space, cupboards, and hidey-holes, pegs for my clothes. The design was all Henry’s, and he’d taken a devilish satisfaction out of shaping my surroundings. The carpet was royal blue, the furnishings simple. Even after six months, I walked around the place as if blind, touching everything, marveling at the feel of it, the scent of the wood. After my parents died, I’d been raised by a maiden aunt, a woman whose relationship with me entailed more theory than affection. Without ever actually saying so, she conveyed the impression that I was there on approval, like a mattress, subject to return if the lumps didn’t smooth out. To give her credit, her notions of child raising, if eccentric, were sound, and what she taught me in the way of worldly truths has served me well. Still, for most of my life, I’ve felt like an intruder and a transient, merely marking time until I was asked to move on. Now my interior world had undergone a shift. This was home and I belonged here. While the apartment was rented, I was a tenant for life. The sensation was strange and I still didn’t quite trust it.I turned on my little black-and-white TV, letting the sound keep me company while I puttered around, making supper. I sat at the counter, perched on a barstool, munching on my sandwich as I leafed through the file Vera’d given me. There were copies of the initial claim-a single-car accident with personal injuries-a sheaf of medical bills, some correspondence, and an attached summary of the salient points. The adjuster, Mary Bellflower, had flagged the claim for a variety of reasons; the injury itself was “soft tissue” and subjective, impossible to verify. Ms. Diaz was complaining of whiplash, headaches, dizziness, lower back pain, and muscle spasms, among other things. The repairs to the car were estimated at fifteen hundred dollars, with additional medical bills (all third-generation photocopies, which would permit a bit of tampering with the figures) totaling twenty-five hundred dollars. She was also claiming twelve hundred dollars in lost wages, for a total of fifty-two hundred dollars. There was no police report from the accident scene, and the adjuster was astute enough to pick up on the fact that the collision had occurred shortly after Ms. Diaz’s vehicle had been registered and insured. Also questionable was the fact that the claimant was using a post office box as an address. Mary had ferreted out an actual street address, which she’d included in her notes. I noticed she’d been careful to retain copies of the envelopes (showing date stamps) in which the claim forms had been returned. If charges were filed, these would provide evidence that the U.S. mails had been used, thus opening the matter to federal investigation under mail fraud statutes. In fraudulent cases, the claimant will often hire an attorney whose job it is to stick the screws to the claims representative, pressuring for a quick settlement. Ms. Diaz hadn’t (yet) engaged the services of an attorney, but she was being pushy about reimbursement. I couldn’t imagine why Parnell had turned the case over to Mary Bellflower. On a case this size the temptation is to approve payment fairly quickly to avoid any suggestion of “bad faith” on the part of the insurance company. However, because California Fidelity had recently chalked up such big losses, Maclin Voorhies, the company vice president, was taking a dim view of rubber stamping. Thus, the matter had been referred to me for follow-up. With Titus on the scene, it might turn out to be too little too late, but that’s where matters stood.It was ten when I finally turned the lights out and went up to bed. I opened one of the windows and leaned my head against the frame, letting the cold air wash across my face. The moon was up. The night sky was clear and the stars were as piercing as pinpricks. A weak storm front was moving in, and a chance of showers was being predicted sometime in the next couple of days. So far, there was no sign of rain. I could hear the muffled tumble of the surf a block away. I crawled under the covers and flipped on the clock radio, staring up at the skylight. A country song began to play, Willie Nelson in a wistful account of pain and suffering. Where is Robert Dietz tonight? I asked myself. I’d hired myself a private investigator the previous May when my name showed up as one of the four finalists on somebody’s hit list. I’d needed a bodyguard and Dietz turned out to be it. Once the situation was defused, he’d stayed on for three months. He’d been gone now for two. We were neither of us letter writers and too cheap to call each other very often since he’d left for Germany. His departure was wrenching, the banal and the bittersweet mingling in about equal parts.“I’m not good at good-byes,” I’d said the night before he left.“I’m not good at anything else,” he’d replied with that crooked smile of his. I didn’t think his pain was any match for mine. I might have been wrong, of course. Dietz was not the sort of man given to unrestrained expressions of anguish or distress, which is not to say such feelings didn’t exist for him.The hard part about love is the hole it leaves when it’s gone... which is the substance of every country-and-westem song you ever heard....The next thing I knew, it was 6:00 A.M. and my alarm was peeping like a little bird. I rolled out of bed and grabbed my running clothes, pulling on sweat pants, sweat shirt, crew socks, and Adidas. I paused to brush my teeth and then headed down the spiral stairs to my front door. The sun hadn’t risen yet, but the darkness had eased up to a charcoal haze. The morning air was damp and smelled of eucalyptus. I clung to the front gate and did a couple of stretches-more form than content-using the walk over to Cabana Boulevard as a way of warming up to some extent. Sometimes I wonder why I continue to exercise with such diligence. Paranoia, perhaps... the recollection of the times when I’ve had to run for my life.When I reached the bike path I broke into an awkward trot. My legs felt like wood and my breathing was choppy. The first mile always hurts; anything after that is a snap by comparison. I shut my mind off and tuned in to my surroundings. To the right of me, the ocean was pounding at the beach, a muted thunder as restful as the sound of rain. Sea gulls were screeching as they wheeled above the surf. The Pacific was the color of liquid steel, the waves a foamy mass of aluminum and chrome. The sand became a mirror where the water receded, reflecting the softness of the morning sky. The horizon turned a salmon pink as the sun crept into view. Long arms of coral light stretched out along the horizon, where clouds were beginning to mass from the promised storm front. The air was cold and richly scented with salt spray and seaweed. Within minutes, my stride began to lengthen and I could feel a mindless rhythm orchestrate all the moving parts. As it turned out, this was the last time I’d have a chance to jog for weeks. Had-I-but-known, I might have enjoyed it a lot more than I did.
