---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_008.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["jimmy", "bibianna", "like", "door", "one", "could", "time", "u", "back", "got", "table", "head", "hand", "heard", "front", "going", "guy", "said", "seemed", "moved", "first", "face", "man", "right", "toward"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/HIsforHomicideAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit008html

---


Unknown
Chapter 7I PUT MY hand in his and followed. He was one of those men who can make you feel like Ginger Rogers on the dance floor, conveying an entire set of suggestions in the way he applied pressure to the small of my back. He moved automatically while he scanned the bar, his gaze shifting restlessly across the room. It was behavior I recognized. There’s really no such thing as an “ex-cop” or a cop who’s “off-duty” or “retired.” Once trained, once indoctrinated, a cop is always alert, assessing reality in terms of its potential for illegal acts. Whatever Jimmy’s failings as a police officer, corruption being foremost, I couldn’t picture him doing anything else with his life. It was hard for me to believe he’d sabotaged himself so thoroughly, cutting himself off from the only work he’d ever cared about. It wasn’t really out of character for him, but it wasn’t smart. What was he going to do now? Retire to what?He sensed my preoccupation and refocused his attention. “Why so quiet?”“I was thinking about the trial, wondering how you got caught up in that stuff to begin with.”“I started out as a JD,” he reminded me.“You were twelve. You didn’t have anything at stake back then. I know you’ve had problems, but I never thought you were dirty.”“Lighten up. What’s that supposed to mean? I’m no dirtier than anybody else. Come on, Kinsey. You know how it is. I palmed cash sometimes. Hell, everybody does. I saw guys palming cash the first day I ever went to work. So it’s not like this was anything new-it just wasn’t organized. I didn’t cheat little old ladies out of their Social Security checks. These were fuckin’ coke dealers-human garbage. The worst. The money wasn’t even legal, but there it sat. You have any idea what it’s like to make a bust like that? You could have two hundred thousand-hell, half a million dollars-layin’ on the table in these nice neat stacks, all tied up with rubber bands. It doesn’t even seem real. It’s like funny money. Props. So who’s gonna point a finger if a stack of bills disappears? The launderers? Get real. Those guys repudiate cash on the spot because then you got no hard evidence. By the time it gets booked in, there’s twenty thousand less. Who knows where it went? Who even gives a shit?”“You were skimming off more than twenty thousand, from what the papers said. Didn’t it ever occur to you that you were being set up?”“Sergeant Renkes was rakin’ off four times the money we were, so why would I think he was setting us up? On the face of it, he had more to lose than we did.”“But why all the conspicuous consumption?” I said. “The newspapers talked about speedboats and condos... luxury cars. On a cop’s salary? Didn’t you think anybody’d notice?”Jimmy laughed. “Nobody said we were smart. I wanted the perks. We all did, and why not? So it turns out the whole thing was a setup. Maybe we shoulda guessed. Anyway, that’s why Bosco blew his brains out. Because we’d been stung and he couldn’t see any other way out. Renkes headed up the unit we were working... he set the game up, invited us to play, and then he turned us in. It was all departmental housecleaning, and Danny Renkes was the janitor.”“Did you know the bust was coming?”“In some ways, sure. There were rumors for months. Nobody really wanted to believe it. I was on disability by then, so I wasn’t an active player when the bust went down. I’d done my share, of course, and Renkes knew that. First time I heard the scuttlebutt, I started asking around. Everybody said the same thing. Run for cover, dude. Bail out. Get a lawyer before the shit hits the coast like a hurricane. I hired the smartest motherfucker in the business. Had to hock everything I owned to pay the man’s retainer, but it was worth every penny. Wilfred Brentnell. You ever heard of him?”“Who hasn’t? I was told the only case he ever lost was up here. Nikki Fife, remember her? I guess the Santa Teresa courts weren’t that impressed with his expertise.”“That’s the price you pay for living in the provinces. The man’s a whiz. First rate. They call him ‘Bent Willy’ because he’s got a finger crooked like that from some kind of accident.”“What about Renkes? Aren’t you bitter about him?”“I don’t hold it against him. I mean, I understand why the man did it. I wouldn’t have done it myself, but then I wasn’t caught first like he was. I didn’t have the DA breathin’ down my neck, cuttin’ deals.”“Deals?”“Shit, yes. They got him on another rap. You knew that, didn’t you?”I shook my head. “I only caught the story in fragments.”“Oh, yeah. They had that dude cold. Thing about Renkes is he sold out cheap. He got burnt. He should have taken it on the chin instead of blowin’ the whistle on the rest of us. But that’s life, right?”The music ended. We moved toward the table, passing Bibianna. Jimmy uttered a low growl and gripped her by the back of the neck, claiming her with his touch. She turned with a smile and he pulled her in against him in a hip-grinding embrace, probably meant to reassert his proprietary rights. Bibianna pushed him away, but she was laughing as she did it and the gesture had no force. He slung an arm across her shoulder in an affectionate hammerlock. They kissed again. I could feel my eyes roll heavenward. We sat down and ordered yet another round of beers.The noise level was rising, alcohol unleashing a manic babble of laughter and loud talk, with quarrelsome undertones. The air was gray with cigarette smoke, the sharp report of slammers coming down one after another in steady succession, like a trio of carpenters with hammers. The music started up again, this time with lighting effects added, guaranteed to send you into seizures. Out on the dance floor, a drunk toppled backward, crashing into a table. A shriek went up, a chair broke, glasses flew in a spray of glass shards and tequila. Jimmy and Bibianna didn’t seem to notice. They were doing a sit-down version of the dirty-boogey, imitating all those terrible movie scenes where coupies tongue each other on the screen and chew each other’s lips. Being with lovers can be such a trial to those of us who are celibate. The very air was charged, sparks leaped between them in a nearly imperceptible arc. Every time their eyes locked, I could sense their underwear getting damp.I glanced at my watch: eleven-fifteen. Enough of this. I scraped my chair back. “That’s it for me,” I said. “Time to go. Good night. It’s been great.” It took a while to get their attention. Jimmy managed to pull out of a nosedive of a kiss. He looked up at me with heavy-lidded surprise, still breathing hard.“Hope I didn’t interrupt anything,” I said.Lust had slowed his responses and I could see him grope for his speaking voice. “Don’t go,” he croaked. “Stick around. We need to talk.”“About what?”Bibianna had to lean forward in order to be heard, but she seemed pretty cool by comparison. “Too noisy here. We’re going next door to grab a bite to eat. Why don’t you come with us?”I was torn, I confess. I’d spent much of the day setting up the contact and I knew I’d be smart to cement the relationship. There was a possibility, of course, that Jimmy Tate might reveal the truth about my identity, but I thought I could trust him to keep his mouth shut. At the moment, he seemed more concerned about getting laid. They were teasing themselves, postponing the inevitable, while I was only marking time. Oh, hell, I thought, I’m going to end up alone in my bed anyway, so why rush? I zipped up my leather jacket while I waited for them to disentangle all the various body parts. As we moved through the crowd toward the front door, I got a couple of offers, but I didn’t take them seriously. Both were addressed to “Hey, you... yeah, you...” accompanied by much display and posturing. One kid looked like he was sixteen. The other had a big gold tooth sticking out in front.The three of us left the bar, stepping into a light rain. Jimmy grabbed Bibianna’s hand and they began to run. I trotted behind them, catching up when they reached the little restaurant three doors down. After the high-decibel racket in the bar, the cafe we entered was as quiet as a deprivation tank. Bourbon Street was small, essentially one long, narrow room that resembled a mock New Orleans alleyway. The walls were brick, broken up by a series of false windows and doorways, backlighted to create the illusion of warm interiors. A series of balconies jutted out at the level of the second floor, suggesting a gallery of apartments surrounded by wrought-iron railings, the pseudo-French Quarter setting complete with wall-mounted lamps in which tapered light bulbs flickered like windblown candles. Fake green ivy snaked its way up the wall, looking so real I could have sworn I smelled the breeze that seemed to rattle through the leaves.The restaurant kitchen was hidden around one corner where a wall angled out. The scent of shrimp touffee and blackened red fish hovered in the air as if you’d caught a whiff of someone else’s Sunday dinner. There were seventeen tables in all, most of them empty, each covered with white butcher’s paper. Hurricane lamps provided illumination that flattered the patrons, at the same time dispensing light sufficient to eat by.Jimmy ordered Cajun popcorn-crawfish parts fried crisp with a spicy sauce-and then a pot of jambalaya for the three of us. Bibianna wanted oysters on the half shell first. I watched them negotiate the meal, feeling strangely passive myself. They argued the issue of wine versus beer and finally ordered both. They’d become nearly playful, while I felt myself disconnect. I picked at a combread muffin, trying to figure out what time it was in Dietz’s life. Germany was what, eight hours ahead of us? I entertained a few wicked fantasies about Dietz, while observing Bibianna and Jimmy idly as if through a two-way mirror. It seemed clear to me that there was more going on here than a quick fling. Jimmy Tate was a good-looking guy with all the sunny charm of a California surfer, wire-rimmed glasses adding interest to a face that might otherwise have been too handsome to warrant serious consideration. Handsome men have never held a fascination for me, but he was an exception, probably because of our shared history. He’d played hard in his life-booze and drugs, late nights, bar fights-and at thirty-four was just beginning to show evidence of self-abuse. I could see fine lines near his eyes, deeper lines around his mouth. Bibianna’s youth and her dark Latino beauty were a perfect counterpoint to his blond, blue-eyed attractiveness. They seemed suited for one another, a crooked cop and a con artist... both willing to cut corners, both manipulating the system, looking for a fast buck. Neither was malicious but they must have recognized the lawlessness in each other’s natures. I wondered what had drawn them together in the first place, whether they had sensed the shared bonds of mutiny and trespass. The similarities certainly weren’t apparent on the surface, but I suspect lovers have some unerring instinct for the qualities that both attract and condemn them in relationships.When the food arrived, they fell on it with the same lusty appetites they exhibited for one another, killing a bottle of red wine between them. I wasn’t interested in anything more to drink. I concentrated on the meal in front of me with the kind of gusto that can only be thought of as sexual sublimation. After the beers I’d had, it was nice to have the opportunity to clear my head for the drive home. The place was beginning to fill up with the late night crowd. The noise was on the rise, but it couldn’t begin to compete with the bar we’d just left. Dimly, I was aware of the front door behind me, opening at intervals as the midnight rush began-people looking for hot coffee, a wedge of sweet potato pie. Nature called again in response to all the beers I’d drunk. “Where are the restrooms?”Bibianna pointed toward the rear. She and Tate were both bombed and I began to wonder if I’d have to ferry them both back to her place in the interests of safety. “Be right back,” I said.I wound my way through the tables, spotting the posted sign that indicated the location of the restrooms and the public telephones. I pushed through hurricane shutters and found myself in a short corridor, lighted by the same flickering bulbs. At the end of the hallway, there were two pay phones flanking an exit with a sign above it reading THIS DOOR MUST BE KEPT UNLOCKED DURING BUSINESS HOURS.To my right were two doors marked M and W. I pushed into the W. The light was better. There was a two-sink counter to my left with a mirror running above it, a paper towel rack above a metal trash bin, and two stalls, one of which was in use. I entered the other. Under the raised partition between the stalls, I could see the feet of the other’s occupant, whose copious urination sounded like a quart of lemonade being poured from a great height. I glanced idly at her shoes: patterned stockings, sling-back pumps with spike heels. I squinted, bending for a closer look. I’d seen the same shoes or a pair just like them on the blonde at the CF offices earlier. I heard the toilet flush. I reassembled myself in haste while she washed her hands and snatched a towel from the dispenser. I heard the rustle of paper as she dried her hands. I flushed the toilet in my cubicle, stalling for time. I didn’t dare leave the cubicle until I knew she was gone because she might well recognize my face. I heard the tip-tap of her heels crossing the tile floor. As soon as the door closed behind her, I emerged and moved swiftly to the door. I poked my head out into the corridor. I caught sight of her at one of the pay phones, inserting numerous coins into the slot. She turned away slightly as if to insure privacy. It was the woman who called herself Karen Hedgepath: spiky, punk blond hair, severely cut business suit. She kept herself in profile with her right hand pressed to her ear to block out noises from the restaurant. From the shift in her posture, I guessed that her call had been picked up. She began to speak rapidly, making gestures with her free hand. I did an about-face and returned to the main part of the restaurant while she was still occupied. A quick check revealed the presence of the big guy with the plaid sport coat. He was seated with his back to me at a two-top on the side wall, but I recognized his jacket and the set of his shoulders. He was smoking a cigarette, a bottle of red wine visible on the table in front of him.At our table, the seats were arranged so that I was facing the restrooms, my back to the front door, with Bibianna on my right and Jimmy Tate across from me. I kept my voice down, one eye cocked in case the blonde returned unexpectedly. Bibianna looked at me with curiosity, sensing my alarm. I handed her the menu and said, “I would like for you, very discreetly, to check that doorway leading to the restrooms. A blonde is going to make an appearance in a moment. See if you know her, but don’t let her know you’re looking. You got that?”“Why? What’s going on?” Bibianna said to me.“I heard her on the pay phone outside the John and she was talking about you.”“About me?”Jimmy leaned forward. “What is this?” The blonde appeared, coming through the shutters from the corridor. Her gaze settled lightly on our table and moved on. “Do not crank your head around,” I sang under my breath.Bibianna’s eyes flicked to the woman. The reaction was subtle, but I could see the animation fade from her face. “Oh, hell. I gotta get out of here,” she said.I handed her an open menu, pointing to the first item in the dessert list, which was the key lime pie. Conversationally, I said, “Take your handbag and go to the ladies’ room. Go out through the door at the end of that hall and wait at the mouth of the alley. One of us will pick you up. Leave your jacket draped across the chair. We don’t want it to look like you’re really going anywhere, okay?”Jimmy’s gaze shifted from my face to Bibianna’s. “What’s going on?”Bibianna got to her feet, groping blindly for her handbag. Too late. The couple converged on us. The blond woman placed a firm hand on my shoulder, effectively nailing me to the chair. The guy pressed a Browning. 45 against Bibianna’s spine as if he might be an orthopedist probing for a hemiated disk. I saw Jimmy reach for his. 38, but the guy shook his head. “I got the option to smoke her if there’s any problem whatsoever. Your choice.” Jimmy put both hands flat on the table. Bibianna picked up her jacket and her handbag. Jimmy and I watched helplessly as the three of them moved toward the back door. Jimmy had better instincts about these things than I did. The minute they were out of sight, he bolted for the front, attracting startled looks from all the patrons he bumped in passing. He didn’t bother to be polite. The front door banged open and he was gone. I threw some money on the table and headed after him.By the time I hit the street, he was already pounding toward the corner, elbows pumping, gun drawn. The streets were damp, the air filled with a fine mist. I ran after him, plowing straight through a puddle on the walk. In the distance, I could hear tires squeal in the alleyway where the couple must have had a car parked. I reached the intersection moments after Jimmy did. A Ford sedan shot out of the mouth of the alley three doors down. Jimmy, as if moving in slow motion, took a stance and fired. The back window shattered. He fired again. The right rear tire blew and the Ford took a sudden fishtailing detour into a van parked at the curb. There was the gut-wrenching wham! of metal objects colliding. The Ford’s front bumper clattered to the pavement, and glass fragments showered down with a delicate tinkling. The few pedestrians within range were running for cover, and I could hear a woman’s protracted scream. The front doors of the Ford seemed to open simultaneously. The blond woman emerged from the passenger side, the big guy from the driver’s side, taking cover behind the yawning car door as he turned and took aim. I hit the pavement and flattened myself in the shelter of a line of trash cans. The ensuing shots sounded like kernels of popcorn in a lidded saucepan. I hunched my shoulders, tasting grit, sucking up the mixed smell of garbage and rain-wet cement. I heard three more shots fired in succession, one of them plowing into the pavement near my head. I feared for Jimmy, felt a sick sense of dread for Bibianna, too. Someone was running. At least somebody was still alive-I just wasn’t sure who. I heard the footsteps fade, then silence. I pulled myself up onto my hands and knees and scrambled toward a parked car, peering over the hood. Jimmy was standing across the street. Abruptly, he sank down on the curb and put his head on his knees. There was no sign of the blonde. Bibianna, apparently unhurt, clung to the Ford’s rear fender and wept hysterically. I rose to my feet, puzzled by the sudden quiet. I approached her with care, wondering where the guy in the plaid sport coat had gone. I could hear panting, a labored moan that suggested both anguish and extreme effort. On the far side of the Ford, I caught sight of him, dragging himself along the sidewalk. There was a wet patch of bright blood between his shoulder blades. There was blood streaming down the left side of his face from a head wound. He seemed completely focused on the journey, determined to escape, moving with the same haphazard coordination of a crawling baby, limbs occasionally working at cross-purposes. He began to weep with frustration at the clumsiness of his progress. He must have been a man who’d always counted on his physical strength to carry him through, who’d enjoyed a certain unquestioned supremacy by reason of his size. Now the sheer bulk of his body was an impediment, a burden he couldn’t quite manage. He laid his head down, resting for a moment before he inched forward again. A crowd had collected, like the spectators at the finish line of a marathon. No one cheered. The faces were respectful, uncertain, perplexed. A woman moved toward the injured man and dropped beside him, reaching out tentatively. At her touch, a deep howl seemed to rise from him, guttural and pain-filled. There is no sound so terrible as a man’s sorrow for his own death. The woman looked up, dazed, at the people standing nearby.“Help,” she called hoarsely. She couldn’t get any volume in her voice. “Please help this man. Can’t anybody help?”No one moved.Already, there were sirens. Jimmy Tate lifted his head.
