---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_022.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["raymond", "car", "luis", "could", "bibianna", "got", "back", "going", "said", "u", "right", "like", "took", "caddy", "would", "door", "eye", "one", "chopper", "gun", "hand", "still", "seat", "get", "look"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/HIsforHomicideAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit022html

---


Unknown
Chapter 21WE TOOK OFF. Bibianna had no more than a two-minute head start. Raymond placed the handgun between his thighs. At fifty miles an hour, he really didn’t have to worry that I’d bolt from the moving vehicle. He jammed down on the accelerator, pushing the shimmying Ford to sixty, sixty-five. Streetlights streamed by. I hung on for dear life, my eyes pinned to the road with all the horrified fascination of a funhouse ride. Judging from the consternation of the drivers on all sides of us, Bibianna must have been cutting through red lights at the intersections just ahead.Raymond didn’t seem nearly as concerned as I was with the cars or pedestrians, with the niceties of stoplights or the sanctity of crosswalks. People were diving out of his path, a string of honking horns and curses flying up in our wake. He picked up the car phone and held it against the steering wheel so he could punch in a number with his thumb. He listened for one ring, two. Someone picked up on the other end.He said, “‘Ey, Chopper! Bibianna just took off in the Caddy and I need some help.... Right. She’ll hit the 405 northbound at Avalon. If you miss us at the Harbor, try Crenshaw or Hawthorne.”There was obviously a question being posed from the other end.“I’ll leave that up to you, man,” Raymond said. He hung up. He set the phone down and retrieved the gun from the fleshy holster of his thighs, holding it in his right hand while he steered with his left.We were still on Avalon Boulevard, screaming toward the freeway. By the time we reached Carson, the light was green and we sailed through. Raymond had eased back to sixty miles an hour, squeezing out a lane of his own between parked cars and the moving vehicles crawling toward the on ramp. I braced myself, one hand on the dashboard, one hand clutching the seat back. I could see drivers in cars just ahead spotting us in their rearview mirrors-first the casual glance, then the double take as they calculated our speed, realizing that we would shortly be climbing up their rear bumpers. Some cars would speed up, crowding left to allow us room to pass. Some would take the first avenue of escape they could find, squealing into driveways, up onto the sidewalk-anything to avoid the inevitable rear-end collision. I found myself gritting my teeth in silence, then warbling out a cry of fear and distress as we overtook each car and managed, somehow, to get past.Raymond’s face was totally composed, his concentration intense. I could see now that his pupils had been reduced to pinpoints, but he showed no other signs of heroin intoxication. Maybe he had his doses so carefully calibrated that he could function normally even with his veins full of smack. He sideswiped a parked car and I shrieked involuntarily, my head jerking back as the impact bounced us into the oncoming traffic. He corrected our course. If he was aware of my vocalization, he gave no indication of it. The irony wasn’t lost on me, that in this situation of high stress, I was exhibiting all of Raymond’s symptoms. Maybe in his neurological makeup, some part of him was forever reacting to high-speed chases and phantom crashes, narrowly averted disasters from which he saved himself with quick action and spontaneous yelps of horror, dismay, and surprise.We careered to the right, up the on ramp to the 405, northbound. I had no idea how he knew she’d be there, but I spotted Bibianna just ahead of us in the black Caddy the moment we merged with freeway traffic. It was late Saturday evening, so we weren’t looking at the usual jam and crawl of the rush hour. I kept my eyes glued to the road, praying mutely for her safety. She probably thought she was free, not realizing he was already there behind her only eight cars back. He tucked the handgun between his thighs again and picked up the car phone, punching in the number with his thumb. He spoke rapidly to Chopper, giving our coordinates. I could hear them calculate the projected point of interception. My heart was still pounding and I watched the Caddy fearfully, scanning the freeway for some sign of the CHP.We had just passed the on ramp at Rosecrans when I heard the chirp of a car horn next to us. I looked over at the next lane. The car was a Chevy, dark blue. Chopper was driving. Raymond pointed at the Caddy and then sliced his index finger across his throat. Chopper grinned and gave Raymond the thumbs-up. Raymond eased his foot off the accelerator, dropping back to normal speed, while the guy in the Chevy eased into our lane and sped up. The last I saw of Bibianna, the Chevy was just beginning to overtake her.That’s when I caught a glimpse of the vanity license plate. A chill puckered my scalp and rippled down my spine, the cold wedging like a pillow in the small of my back. The plate read PARNELL. Raymond must have had Parnell Perkins’s car ever since his death, probably using it to collect phony damage and injury claims.Raymond spotted a black-and-white in the southbound lane. It was possible somebody’d called the cops to report his erratic driving because the officer gave the Ford a quick startled look as we passed. Raymond cut over two lanes to the right and took the nearest off ramp. Even if the cop circled back, we’d be gone. He found a darkened side street, pulled over to the curb, and parked. He sat back and expelled a breath of air.I had started to shake, from fear, from relief, from visions of Bibianna’s fate and bloody images of Bibianna’s mother, whom I’d never even laid eyes on. I thought about Parnell facedown in the parking lot with a bullet in his head. I pressed my hands between my knees, teeth chattering, my breath coming in gasps.Raymond was looking at me with puzzlement. “What’s the matter with you?”“Shut up, Raymond. I don’t want to talk to you.”“I didn’t do nothing. What’d I do?”“You didn’t do anything? I don’t believe this....”“Chick stole my car and I chased her. What’d you expect?”“You’re crazy!”“I’m crazy? Why? Because I won’t let that bitch take me for everything I’m worth? You better believe it.”“What’s going to happen?”“Beats me.”I sat up, irritated with his attitude. “Don’t play dumb, Raymond. What’s Chopper going to do to her?”“How do I know? I’m not a fuckin’ psychic. Don’t worry about it. It’s got nothing to do with you.”“What about her mother?”“What do you care? Quit acting like this is my fault.”I looked at him with astonishment. “Who’s fault is it, men?”“Bibianna’s,” he replied, as if it were self-evident.“Why is it her fault? You’re the one who cut the woman.”“Who, Gina? She’s alive, isn’t she? Which is more man you can say for Chago. I got a brother dead, and who do you think did that?”“Not her,” I shot back.“That’s my point,” he replied patiently. “She didn’t do nothing. She’s innocent, right? Just like him. Tit for tat. It says so right in the Bible-an eye for an eye-and that’s all this is about. Lookit, I could have killed the bitch, but I didn’t, did I. And you know why? Because I’m a good guy. Nobody gives me credit. Bibianna has to learn not to fuck with me, I told you that. You think I like this? She’d done what I said to begin with, we wouldn’t be here.”“Which is what?”“Quit horsing around and get serious. She shoulda married me when I asked her. I’m not stupid, you know. I don’t know what’s going on, but I’ve been as patient as I’m gonna be. And that goes for you, too. You got that?”I stared at him, at a loss for words. His view of the world was so skewed there was no reasoning with him. He really seemed to see himself as innocent, the victim of a circumstance in which everyone was responsible for his behavior except him. Like every other “victim” I’ve known, he clung to his “one-down” position as justification for his abuse of other people.Raymond picked up the car phone and punched in a number. “‘Ey, Luis. Raymond. Put some clothes on, we’re swinging by to pick you up.” He glanced at his watch. “Ten minutes. And bring the mutt.”He started the car then and pulled out, hanging a left onto a main artery as we headed south again. I glanced out the window. Raymond was driving at a sedate forty miles an hour. We were now on Sepulveda, not far from the airport. Not a wonderful neighborhood, but I thought I’d be safe until I could get a call through to the cops. I opened the car door. Raymond speeded up.“Please stop the car. I’m getting out,” I said.He picked up the gun again and pointed it at me. “Close the door.”I did as I was told. He turned his attention to the road again. In the glow from the streetlights, I studied his profile, hair still damp from the shower, the tousle of curls, dark eyes, long lashes, the dimple in his chin. He was bare-chested, barefoot, his skin very pale. I could see the faint scarring in the crooks of his arms. My guess was that after the intensity of the chase and the rush of adrenaline, the euphoric effects of his shooting up were beginning to wane. His ticcing had returned. The mysterious connections in his neurological circuitry were touching off a series of reactions, as if he were enduring tiny jolts of electricity. His mouth came open and he jerked his neck to the right. His body jumped with the same irrepressible response I’ve felt when a doctor pops with his rubber hammer on my patellar reflex. In that quick tap, there isn’t any way to prevent my foot from flying out. Raymond seemed to live with the constant assault of invisible rubber hammers, which rapped him randomly at all hours of the day, testing every reflex... little elves and fairies tapping on him like a boot. If his gun hand jerked the wrong way, he was going to plug me full of holes. My own adrenaline had seeped away, leaving me depleted.“Oh, God, Raymond. Please. I just want to go home,” I said wearily.“I’m not going to let you out here. It’s too dangerous. You wouldn’t last a block.”I wanted to laugh at the absurdity of his concern. There he was, holding me at gunpoint, probably willing to kill me if it came to that, but he didn’t want me out on the streets in a questionable neighborhood. Raymond punched in another number. He really reminded me of some high-powered business exec.Someone answered on the other end.“Hey, yeah,” he said. “I got a problem. Somebody just stole my car....”I slouched down on my spine, knees propped against the dashboard, listening with wonder as Raymond availed himself of city police services in the matter of his missing Cadillac. From his end of the conversation, I gathered he was going to have to go over to the 77th Division and file a stolen vehicle report, but he was the soul of cooperation, Mr. Righteous Citizen rallying the forces of law and order to his cause. He hung up and we drove in silence as far as Luis’s place.We pulled over at the curb and Raymond gave a quick beep. A moment later, Luis appeared with Perro at his side.Raymond pulled on the emergency brake and got out on the driver’s side. “You drive,” he said to Luis.Luis put the dog in the front seat between us and got behind the wheel. “Where we going?”“Police station.”Luis took off. Perro leaned against me, panting bad breath. I could tell he would have preferred the window seat himself so he could hang his head out and let his ears flap in the passing breeze.Luis watched Raymond in the rearview mirror with guarded interest. “So what’s happening?”“Bibianna stole the Caddy. We gotta file a report.”“Bibianna stole the Caddy?”“Yeah, can you believe that? After all I’ve done for her? I called Chopper and sent him after her. I don’t have time for that shit, you know what I’m talking about?”Luis made no comment. I saw him slide a look in my direction, but what was I going to say?We reached the 77th Division police station. Luis parked on the street and got out of the car, peering into the backseat while Raymond gave him instructions about the stolen Caddy. “What about the registration?” he asked.“It’s in the car,” Raymond said irritably.“You want me to give ’em your telephone number?”“How else are they going to notify me when they find the car?”“Oh.”“Yeah, ‘oh,’ “Raymond said.Luis disappeared.“Guy’s a fuckin’ pinhead,” Raymond said to himself. He kicked the back of my seat. “I still got a gun on you,” he said. “I ain’t forgettin’ it was you helped Bibianna get away.”I waited in the car with Raymond, pinned in place by Perro’s weight, wishing a cop would saunter by so that I could scream for help. Several patrol cars gunned past us, but no one seemed to realize that this tacky-looking Anglo was Nancy Drew in disguise. I stared out at the police station not fifty feet away.Luis came back to the car and got in without a word. He took a quick look in the rearview mirror. I turned around and looked myself, realizing belatedly that Raymond had nodded off.Once we reached the apartment complex, Luis had to help him up the stairs. I went up first, with the dog bringing up the rear. Raymond was awake but seemed groggy and out of it. When we reached the apartment, Luis unlocked the door. For a moment, the exterior lights fell on Raymond’s bare back and I saw that his skin was crisscrossed with scars, like a webbing of white diamonds. The old cuts had healed but had never entirely gone away. The even spacing suggested quite methodical work.Inside the apartment, I scanned the living room, searching for the handbag I’d left behind earlier. I spotted it on the floor, shoved halfway under the upholstered chair. It had apparently been kicked to one side during the struggle with Raymond and the top was now yawning open. Luis held Raymond’s gun and he motioned me toward the couch. I took a seat. From that angle, the butt of the SIG-Sauer was clearly visible in the handbag. I willed myself to look away. I didn’t dare make a move for it for fear Luis would catch sight of it. Raymond staggered off to bed.I was forced to sleep on the couch that night. Perro guarded the front door while Luis dozed in the chair, keeping watch over me, Raymond’s gun in hand. The kitchen bulb glowed like a nightlight. Now and then, Luis and I would stare at each other across the dimly lighted room, his dark eyes devoid of any feeling whatsoever. It’s the same look you get from a lover when he’s moved on to someone new. Whatever moments you might have shared get buried under layers of hostility and indifference.I was jolted awake at eight by a banging on the front door. Perro started barking savagely. I swung my feet off the couch and got up, automatically moving toward the door. Luis beat me to it. He had the dog by the collar. He opened the door and I saw Dawna on the threshold in a nifty black suit. Oh, great. This was what Dolan and Santos called “Don’t worry about Dawna, we’ll keep her out of circulation.” Raymond emerged from the master bedroom, pulling his shirt on. He was still barefoot, wearing his wrinkled chinos from the night before. “What’s happening?” he asked.“It’s Dawna,” Luis said.As Raymond moved to the door, I leaned over the upholstered chair and eased my handbag out from under it, closing the flap across the butt of the gun.Luis had turned. “Sit down.”“I’m sitting,” I said irritably. I took a seat in the upholstered chair, feigning boredom while Raymond and Dawna went through murmured greetings. Her face had crumpled at the sight of him. Raymond put his arms around her and rocked her where they stood. Wait till she got a load of me. The only comfort I had was the handbag, which now rested to the right of the chair, just beyond my fingertips. Luis had moved into the kitchen and he was leaning against the kitchen counter, rolling a joint with complete absorption. Stoned on Sunday morning. Just what we all needed. Dawna sat down on the couch, still crying into Raymond’s handkerchief.Her face was Kabuki white, her mouth a pout of bright red. Her hair had been newly bleached to the color of typing paper, standing up in spikes as if somebody’d folded it in quarters and cut it with a pair of scissors. The effect was of an albino rooster. Where her suit jacket gaped open, I caught sight of a thickly padded gauze bandage, secured with adhesive tape. She didn’t look so hot and my guess was her injury had taken its toll. I could see Perro lying on the floor near the couch, staring at the juicy part of Dawna’s leg. I studied her with dread and anxiety. Once she regained her composure, she was going to notice me. There was a fair chance she’d remember me from the CF offices, but what was I going to do?
