---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_013.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["raymond", "dog", "like", "guy", "one", "said", "could", "head", "wall", "eye", "know", "bibianna", "luis", "back", "door", "side", "left", "apartment", "seemed", "paper", "hand", "get", "take", "life", "time"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/HIsforHomicideAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit013html

---


Unknown
Chapter 12IN THE LADIES’ room, she turned on the faucet and splashed some cold water in her eyes. I pulled out a paper towel and passed it to her. She buried the lower half of her face in the paper toweling, staring at herself in the mirror above the sink. She wiped her hands and threw the paper away. “Thanks for what you did in the car. God, I can’t stand this. I really hate his guts.”“He’s certainly crazy about you,” I said.She moved into one of the stalls, trying the window above the toilet. “Shit. This is nailed shut. Do you think there’s another way out of here?”“I don’t know. I’ll check,” I said. I was in a bit of a bind with Bibianna, wanting to help her without actually giving up proximity to Raymond Maldonado. I went over to the door and opened it a crack, making a show of searching for a rear exit. All I caught sight of was Raymond doing one of his head jerks. The public pay phone on the wall was tantalizingly near, but Luis was bound to spot me if I tried to use it. I closed the door again. “What’s the matter with Raymond?”“He’s getting worse,” she said morosely. “I never saw him so bad.”“Yeah, but what causes that?”“It’s called Tourette. TS, whatever that is. It’s like something in his nervous system-neurological and like that. All I know is he does that stuff over and over and sometimes he gets into uncontrollable rages. He’s got pills he won’t take because he can’t stand the side effects.”“He’s had it all his life?”“I guess so. He doesn’t ever talk about it much.”“But he’s not doing anything for it?”“Smokin’ dope helps, he says, and he sometimes shoots up.”“Is that why you left, because of the Tourette?”“I left because he’s a jerk! The other I could live with, but the guy’s turning mean. It’s got nothing to do with his condition,” she said. “Jesus, we gotta figure out how to get out of here.” She moved into the second stall and tried the window there. Also locked. “The hell with it. We’re going to have to make a break for it some other way. I wish Tate were here.”I said, “You and me both, kid. You think Raymond knows you’re involved with him?”“God, I hope not. He’s so jealous, he can’t see straight.”“How’d you meet Tate?”“He crashed a costume party last Halloween. Dressed as a cop. Everybody thought it was a joke, except me. I can smell a cop a mile off.” She took a brush from her handbag and ran it through her hair. “It’s really different with Jimmy.”“Well, that’s obvious,” I said. “I take it you’re in love with him.”She smiled fleetingly for the first time since we’d left the jail. “I better be. We got married week before last. That’s why my place is coming up for rent. I’m moving in with him.”The door flew open. I must have jumped a foot. It was Luis with his. 45 and his little smirking mustache. “All right, ladies. Time to go. Speed it up. Raymond says you been in here long enough.”I waved at him dismissively. “Oh, come off it, Luis. What is it with you? Running around acting like an idiot. I still have to tee-tee and so does she.”He colored faintly. “Snap it up.”“Right,” I said, moving over to the first stall. Out of the corner of my eye, I saw him shove the gun in his waistband and back out of the room.Ten minutes later we were on the road.So that’s how I came to be speeding down 101 in a low-rider Wednesday morning, October 26. Vera’s wedding was coming up on Monday and I was going to miss it, sure as shit. If Raymond killed Bibianna, he was going to have to kill me, too. By Halloween, I’d probably be in the long-term parking lot at LAX, crammed in the trunk of some stranger’s vehicle. Even in the hot sun, it can sometimes take days before anybody picks up the scent.Luis drove while Raymond sat in the front seat fiddling with the radio. At irregular intervals, he would go through his ticcing sequence. If he was talking to Luis, the tics would seem to subside, only to assail him with a vengeance as soon as his mouth was shut. Bibianna had curled up on the backseat in a troubled sleep. At least now she wouldn’t have to worry about being quizzed by the Santa Teresa cops. I was feeling wired. In the past couple of hours, I’d passed through fatigue to exhaustion and out to the other side. God knows my work exposes me to an occasional unsavory character, but I really don’t like violence or danger or threats to my health. My semiannual visit to the dentist is as masochistic as I care to get. Yet here I was in the company of these vatos, wondering how I could get to the telephone number Dolan had given me. I missed my beloved handbag, my jacket, and my gun. At the same time, I confess, I felt extraordinarily alive. Perhaps I was merely experiencing one of life’s peak moments before the bottom dropped out.At Oxnard, we left the freeway and continued south on Highway 1, winding our way through the southeastern section of town. We passed the Naval Construction Battalion Center at Port Hueneme (pronounced “Y-knee-me”). The road began to parallel the deep blue green of the ocean, which was far off to our right. The beaches were deserted except for an occasional fisherman casting his line out into the water. The sand had been packed down and darkened by the rain, but the sky was now cloudless, a clear azure blue. The morning sun had burned the fog away, and I could see straight out to the horizon. On the landward side, loose sand swept down to the highway from rosy beige cliffs creased into folds by erosion, hills flattening out to pale gray scrub, freckled with vegetation.After we passed Point Dume, houses began to appear, rilling the widening strip of land between the road and the ocean, properties piling up rapidly as the miles accrued. In the parking lane, Rvs and pickups were lined end to end. Guys in shorts and wet suits unloaded surfboards and wind-sails. By the time we reached Malibu, apartments and condos and single-family dwellings were crowded cheek by jowl, the architectural mix ranging all the way from chateaus to beach shacks, Italian villas, Tudor mansions, Cape Cod, and concrete. The rich folk with taste had apparently been elsewhere the day the planning commission took a vote. (What planning commission?) As a consequence, the road was densely lined now with retail businesses, signs advertising Texaco, Malibu Lumber, Crown Books, Shoes, Fast Frame, Jack-in-the-Box, Motel, Malibu Inn, Liquor, Jimmy’s Ribs at the Beach, Budget Cars, Palm and Card Reading, Shell Gas, Realty, Arco AM/PM, Malibu Travel, Motel, Liquor, Pizza, Real Estate, Locksmith, Shoe Repair, Malibu Fish Market... a vulgar hodgepodge of neon, billboards, and blinking lights. Traffic was piled up in a perpetual gridlock of Mercedeses, BMWs, and Jaguars.We hit the light where Sunset Boulevard dead-ends at Pacific Coast Highway. The woman in the little sports car idling next to us turned an uneasy eye on Luis with his watch cap and his Walt Disney arms. He had a truly vile suggestion he was kind enough to share with her. Raymond gave his head a censoring thump. Maybe that’s why he wore the watch cap, to keep the brain damage to a minimum.Luis rubbed his head irritably. “Hey, man. Take it easy.”“You take it easy,” Raymond shot back with an apologetic glance at me. It was clear he’d pegged me as the refined one in the crowd.When the light changed, Luis pulled out with a series of jerks that left the rear suspension bucking. Within minutes we had passed from prosperity to privation.Our destination was a beach town a few miles south of the airport in an area tainted with poverty. To the east, the ghetto communities of Compton, South Gate, and Lynwood were rigidly subdivided into gang turfs where some fifteen to twenty homicides marred the average weekend. Here, there were only endless drab buildings decorated with angular territorial declarations thrown up by the taggers with cans of black spray paint. Wait until future cryptographers resurrect those stone tablets. Even the passing city buses were defaced, mobile messengers bearing insults from one gang to the next. The streets were littered with trash and old tires. The winos had already plucked up all the bottles and cans, anything that could be recycled in exchange for Thunderbird revenues. A dilapidated sofa sat on the curb as if waiting for a bus. Listless ghetto warriors loitered near a corner market. On the island side of the four-lane boulevard, every third storefront had been boarded up. Those still doing business were protected by steel bars across plate-glass windows papered over with advertisements.I saw a Burger King, a Savon drugstore, a corner record shop with a big sign reading CLOSED, a post office branch with a U.S. flag drooping from its pole. On the ocean side of the street, there was a tired mix of small frame houses and boxy apartment buildings. All the yards seemed to be raw dirt surrounded by chain-link fences. The poor sections of every city I’ve seen have the following elements in common: sagging porches, flaking paint, grass that’s tenacious if it grows at all, vacant lots filled with rubble, Pepsi-Cola signs, idle children, cars with flat tires permanently parked at the curb, abandoned houses, lethargic men whose eyes turn vacuously as you pass. Violence is a form of theater that only the disenfranchised can afford. Admission is cheap. The bill of fare is an ever-changing drama of life and death, drugs and stickups, drive-bys, retaliations, the fearfulness of mothers who look on in anguish from the sidelines. As often as not, it’s the bystanders who fall prey to the spray of random bullets.We cut inland, driving past six square blocks of housing projects. I could feel anxiety stir like a boiling sickness.By the time we reached Raymond’s place, I had no idea what part of Los Angeles we were in. We parked the Ford out in front of a three-story apartment building, across the street from an automobile salvage yard. There were probably forty units in the apartment complex, arranged in tiers around a concrete courtyard. At first glance, it didn’t seem all that shabby to me. The neighborhood itself wasn’t nearly as impoverished as some we’d traversed.It was midmorning, and even with a nip still in the air, most of the apartment doors stood open. The interiors I glimpsed were crowded, overfurnished, and dismal. The televisions all seemed to be tuned to the Anglo soaps, while the radios, sitting atop the sets, played Hispanic music, curiously at odds with the gringo images. There were Halloween decorations everywhere, but some had been up so long, the pumpkins were getting soft and the crepe-paper skeletons were powdered with dust.The four of us clambered up a rear staircase to the second floor, where we turned left, proceeding to an apartment that overlooked the street. “Is this your place we’re going to?” I asked Raymond. He was walking with Bibianna, the two of them just ahead of me. Luis was bringing up the rear in case I tried to bolt.“This is for when we get married,” Raymond said with a shy glance at her. He felt in his pocket in a sudden recollection. He pulled out a key on a metal ring with a big plastic M attached, probably for Maldonado. He handed it to Bibianna. My guess was he’d meant it to be a ceremonial moment, but she shoved it in her handbag, barely honoring it with a look. Her face was stony and he seemed embarrassed that she showed no enthusiasm for matters that obviously obsessed him.The problem with real life is there’s no musical score. In movies, you know you’re in danger because there’s an ominous chord underlining the scene, a dissonant melodic line that warns of sharks in the water and boogermen behind the door. Real life is dead quiet, so you’re never quite sure if there’s trouble coming up. A possible exception is stepping into a strange apartment full of guys in hairnets. Personally, I’ve never understood how wearing a hairnet ever came to symbolize the baddest of the bad-asses on the street. There were five of them, all Hispanics in their late teens or early twenties, all wearing heavy wool Pendleton shirts buttoned up to their chins. Three were sitting around the kitchen table, one with his girlfriend on his lap. A second girl sat with her bare legs outstretched, tight skirt hiked up to midthigh. She was smoking a cigarette, practicing smoke rings through pouty lips painted bright red. Two guys lounging against the wall came to attention as Raymond came in the door. On the wall was a large handmade sign with “R. I. P.” at the top and Chago’s name in caps below, a pair of praying hands and a crucifix drawn in the space between. Someone had tacked several snapshots of Chago on the wall nearby, along with what looked like a testimonial of some kind. Among the piles of papers on the table was a stack of homemade flyers, reproductions of the same neatly hand-lettered prose. From the somber expressions and the number of beer bottles evident, I gathered these were Chago homies and that we’d interrupted an impromptu wake. I checked for Raymond’s reaction, but he had none. Did he feel no sorrow for his brother’s death?I willed myself to behave casually, assuming an air of nonchalance. What did I have to fear? After all, I wasn’t a prisoner, I was Raymond’s guest. I could pick up the information for Lieutenant Dolan and then head on home. Granted, I don’t usually hang out on gang turf, but I try to be open-minded. There were cultural differences here that I couldn’t even guess at, let alone define. That didn’t make anybody bad, right? So why expect the worst? Because you don’t know what the hell you’re doing, a little voice inside me said.The air was gray with smoke, some of it marijuana, a substance I haven’t abused since I was in high school (except for that brief period when Daniel Wade was in my life). The decor, at a glance, consisted of royal blue shag carpeting and the kind of furniture sold on the roadsides across the border in Mexico. (Also in Orange County on Euclid, south of the Garden Grove Freeway.) It looked like Raymond had made an attempt to upgrade the place, covering the entire large wall to my left with smoky gold mirrored tiles. Unfortunately, the tiles had recently been smashed with a kitchen chair, which had been tossed to one side, its chrome legs askew. Most of the glass had been swept up, but I could see signs of blood on the bare wall behind. It wasn’t bright red or dripping, but it was clear something frightful had taken place here not long ago. No one referred to the destruction. Raymond showed no curiosity at the sight, which lent support to the notion that he was responsible. Bibianna took it in at a glance but said nothing. Maybe she knew better than to mention the fact. I tore my gaze away.On the right, the L of a kitchen was visible, every surface in it piled high with used paper plates, beer bottles, ashtrays, empty cans of Rosarito refrieds. The air smelled of cilantro, corn tortillas, and hot lard. Five brown grocery sacks bulged with refuse, grease showing through in big dark polka dots. On one bag, a quicksilver something disappeared from view.One of the guys at the metal-topped kitchen table labored over a form he was filling out in pencil. His face was dark with frustration. His handgun rested casually on a stack of completed forms, serving as a paperweight. Fleetingly, I wondered if he was an illegal alien filling out fake INS documents. Behind him, daylight poured through a big picture window that cast him in silhouette. In the event of a drive-by, he’d be picked off like a metal bear in a shooting gallery. I heard Raymond call him Tomas, but I couldn’t catch the rest of the conversation.Of the two fellows leaning against the wall, one was wearing a Sony Walkman, a handgun shoved down in his waistband. The other played a hollow note across the mouth of an empty Dos Equis beer bottle. Both bore a passing resemblance to Raymond, and I wondered if they were related-his brothers or cousins. Apparently they all knew Bibianna, but none made eye contact. The two women seemed uneasy at her arrival, exchanging a guarded look.I wasn’t introduced, but my presence generated a sly interest. I was surveyed by several pairs of male eyes, and somebody made a remark that amused those who heard it. Luis appeared again, a Dos Equis in hand. He took up a squatting position, hunkering against the wall, body thrust forward slightly, his head thrown back, staring down his nose at me. There was something arrogant in his bearing, suggesting the sexual superiority of renegades and outlaws. Whatever his purpose, its effect was to establish his claim on me. The other guys seemed to posture for one another but displayed no plumage.At the table, an argument broke out among the three who seemed to be speaking some cholo mix of Spanish and fractured English. I couldn’t understand a word, but the prevailing tone was quarrelsome. Raymond shouted something I was glad I couldn’t translate. The guy with the pencil and paper went back to work with a sulkiness that didn’t bode well.Bibianna, unimpressed with the lot of them, flung her purse in a chair and slipped out of her high-heeled shoes. “I’m taking a shower,” she said, and padded out of the room. Raymond moved to the telephone, where he punched in numbers with his back half-turned. “Alfredo, it’s me....” He dropped his voice into a range I couldn’t hear. From the rear, as he talked, I saw him go through a series of rapid tics, almost like a pantomime or a game of charades.I thought I’d make myself inconspicuous while I decided what to do next. I looked around for a seat and changed my mind abruptly. Just inside the door, about three feet away, there was a pit bull. I don’t know how I’d missed the mutt, but there he was. The dog had a brindle coat with a white chest and white legs. His head was wide and thick, ears uncropped, but tucked in close like a bat’s. There was a leather collar around his thick neck with metal spikes sticking out. Was the blood on the wall connected with the dog? A length of slack chain was attached to his collar, extending about three feet, the other end wrapped around the leg of the oversize royal blue couch. The dog emitted a low humming growl while it stared at my throat. Dogs and I don’t get along that well in the best of circumstances. I’m hardly ever smitten with a beast that looks like it’s prepared to rip out my carotid artery.One of the guys snapped at the dog in Spanish, but the animal didn’t seem to understand the language any better than I did. The guy jerked his head in my direction, the knot of his hairnet sitting in the middle of his forehead like a spider in a web. “Don’t make no sudden moves and don’t never touch his head. He’ll tear your arm off.”“I’m sorry to hear that. What’s his name?” I asked, praying it wasn’t Cujo.“Perro,” he said. And then with a grin, “Means ‘dog’ in Spanish.”“You think that up all by yourself?” I said mildly.Everybody laughed. Ah, they do speak English, I thought.His smile was thin. “He hates gringas.”I glanced at the dog again and shifted my weight, trying to ease away. How could the dog know my nationality? He flattened his ears and exposed his teeth. His upper lip curled back so far, I could see up his nose.“Hello, Perro,” I sang. “Nice dog. Good doggie.” Slowly, I allowed my gaze to drift, thinking the eye contact was perhaps too aggressive for the little fellow’s taste. Wrong move. The dog lunged, erupting into a savage barking that shook his entire body. I shrieked involuntarily, which the guys seemed to think was hilarious. The couch humped about four inches in my direction, bringing him almost in range of me. I could actually feel the hot breath of his bark against my leg like little puffs of wind. “Uh, Raymond?”Raymond, still talking on the phone, held a hand up, impatient at the interruption.“Could somebody call the dog, please?” I repeated the request, this time audibly.Raymond snapped his fingers and the dog sat down. The guy with the Sony Walkman smirked at my relief. Raymond put a hand across the mouth of the receiver and jerked his head in the guy’s direction. “Juan. Take the dog out.” And then to me, “You like a beer? Help yourself. Soon as Bibianna’s done, you can shower if you want.” He returned his attention to the phone. I didn’t move.Grudgingly, Juan removed the handgun from his waistband and laid it on the table. He picked up a chain leash from the arm of the couch and attached it to Perro’s collar. The dog made a quick snapping feint at his hand. Juan pulled his fist back and for a minute the two locked eyes. Juan must have been Alpha male because Perro backed down, reinforcing my contention that dogs aren’t that smart. A drop of sweat began a lazy trickle down the small of my back.Once the dog had been removed, I helped myself to a beer and then took a seat in a wide-armed upholstered chair on the far side of the room. I pulled my feet up under me just in case there were vermin cruising at floor level. For now, there was nothing to do except sip my beer. I laid my head against the chair back. The false high I’d experienced in the car had now drained away, replaced by a thundering weariness. I felt heavy with fatigue, as if tension had generated a sudden weight gain.
