---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_017.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["raymond", "tate", "bibianna", "could", "dog", "luis", "time", "eye", "would", "said", "felt", "table", "face", "back", "arm", "pool", "get", "one", "let", "got", "away", "head", "seemed", "u", "place"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/HIsforHomicideAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit017html

---


Unknown
Chapter 16BIBIANNA WAS ALREADY home, seated at the kitchen table, applying a coat of bright red polish to her nails. She was wearing red shorts and a halter top in a vivid jungle print, red, black, olive green, and white. Her hair was pulled up in a glossy coil on top. Luis was out somewhere walking the dog. I marveled that Bibianna hadn’t escaped while she could. Raymond had forgotten to return the telephone to its hiding place. He didn’t seem aware of it, but Bibianna sure was. She ignored the instrument so studiously I had to guess she’d used it. I caught her eye with a visual query, but she kept her expression blank. I wondered who she’d called. Her mother? Jimmy Tate? Could he be out of jail yet?Raymond glanced at his watch. “Hey. It’s nearly five. Time to call your insurance agent.”My conversation with Mac was brief. Raymond let me handle the transaction without his ear pressed to the phone along with mine. I identified myself as Hannah Moore and Darcy put me through to Mac, who spelled out the particulars of my insurance coverage, making sure the message would sound benign to anybody listening. “Mr. Dolan assured me you were covered in case of accident. Do you still have his number?”“Yes, I’ve got it. Thanks for the information. I appreciate your help.”“Anytime,” he said. “And keep safe.”“I hope to.”Once I’d hung up, I finished jotting down notes: policy number, my deductible, liability, collision, major medical, and death benefits. I was assuming Mac had set up a special policy under the name “Hannah Moore,” with a flag on the computer so he’d be alerted if a claim came in. I gave Raymond the policy number and the data Mac had relayed.Shortly thereafter, I heard Perro tapping along the walkway outside, his breathing hoarse and wheezy as he strained against the leash. Luis opened the door and the dog bounded in. Somewhere, in a brain about the size of a BB, this beast had suddenly decided he remembered me. He charged at me joyfully, knocking into Bibianna as he vaulted across her lap. When he reached me he jumped up, propping his paws on my shoulders so we could stare into each other’s eyes. I leaned sideways against the kitchen table while he slopped a tongue across my mouth. Bibianna had leapt away from him with a shriek, her fingers held aloft so he wouldn’t screw up her nails. Raymond snapped his fingers, but the dog was too intent on true love to obey. Raymond yelled something, which he covered with a cough. I caught a glimpse of his face just as his eyes began to roll back. A tic was tugging at his mouth, his lower lip pulling down grotesquely. His head jerked twice to the left, mouth coming open. His temper seemed to snap and he went for the dog, landing an ill-aimed blow at Perro’s meaty shoulder. The dog snarled and lunged. Raymond punched at the dog again, catching him in the nose. Perro yelped and scrambled away from him, cowering submissively. I moved into the path of Raymond’s fist, blocking his next punch while Bibianna threw herself against him. Raymond shoved her out of the way. He knocked me aside and would have punched the dog again, but Luis hauled Perro by the choke chain and dragged him toward the door. Raymond stood and panted, eyelids fluttering, white slits visible along the rim. The rage and cruelty in his face were frightening, especially since his outburst was directed at the poor dog. Pit bull or no, Perro had a goofy innocence about him and all of us felt protective.Bibianna pushed Raymond into a chair. “What’s the matter with you!”Raymond rubbed at his fist, his self-control returning by degrees. Luis and the dog disappeared. My heart began to pump belatedly. Raymond was breathing hard. I saw his head jerk. He eased his right arm in its socket and did a neck roll to relax. The tension drained from the room.His gaze focused on Bibianna, who was pinning him to the chair, pressing down on his shoulders to prevent his getting up. She straddled his lap, the long, flawless legs anchoring him into place. It was the same move I’d seen her use with Tate the night before last. Hard to believe that less than forty-eight hours ago, she’d been with him.Raymond stared up at her. “What’s the matter? What’s happening?”“Nothing. Everything’s fine,” she said tersely. “Luis took the dog for a walk.”The moment passed. I was beginning to recognize the shifts in his moods. The spill of rage stirred sexuality. Before he could slide his hands up along her thighs, she removed herself from his lap as if she were getting off a horse. She smoothed her shorts and crossed to the television set, where she scooped up the deck of cards that was sitting on top. “Let’splay gin rummy,” she said. “A nickel a point.”Raymond smiled, indulging her, probably thinking he would nail her later.When Luis came back with the dog, Bibianna lent me some jeans, a T-shirt, and some tennies so we could go out to dinner. The four of us left on foot and headed into the dismal commercial district that bordered the apartment complex. We crossed a vacant lot and went in through the rear entrance of a restaurant called El Polio Norteno, which by my translation meant the North Chicken. The place was noisy, vinyl tile floor, the walls covered in panels of plastic laminate. The room felt close, nearly claustrophobic from the flame grills in the rear. Countless chickens were trussed on a rotating spit, brown and succulent, skins crisp and glistening with sputtering fat. The noise level was battering, mariachi music punctuated by a constant irregular banging of the cleavers whacking whole chickens into quarters and halves. The menu was listed on a board behind the register. We ordered at the counter, picked up four beers, and then canvassed, looking for a booth. The place was crowded, patrons spilling out onto a makeshift wooden deck that was actually an improvement. It was quieter out there and the chill California night air was a distinct relief. Moments later, a waitress appeared with our order on a tray, setting down paper plates and plastic flatware. We tore the chicken with our hands, piling shreds of grilled meat onto soft corn tortillas, spooning pinto beans and fresh salsa on top. It was a three-paper-napkin extravaganza of messy hands and dripping chins. Afterward, we adjourned to a bar two doors away. It was nine by then.The Aztlan was smoky, cavernous, ill lighted, occupied almost exclusively by Hispanic men whose eyes, at that hour, were turning slippery from all the alcohol they’d consumed. The laughter came in constant, raucous bursts that were sly and assaultive, very worrisome. There was, on the surface, a thin veneer of control. Under it, and unpredictable, was the boiling violence of youth. The Spanish music I was cranked up to a feverish pitch, forcing loud talk in f aggressive tones that even merriment couldn’t mask. I took my cue from Bibianna, who seemed watchful, her sexuality under wraps. Here, there was none of the familiar bantering I’d seen in the Meat Locker. Raymond was too easily set off and her intentions were too readily misunderstood. Luis seemed right at home, sauntering to the bar with his macho attitude. In his snowy white undershirt, his bare arms were a moving cartoon, Daffy Duck and Donald Duck in aggressive black and yellow.While Luis fetched four more beers, we pushed through the crowd toward the back. In a second room about half the size of the first, there were three pool tables, two of them occupied. The felt surfaces looked as green as grassy islands under hot hanging lights. The dark of the ceiling was broken up by the blinking of multicolored Christmas tree lights that were probably strung up year-round. Raymond found an empty booth and Bibianna slid in. I was bringing up the rear, sidetracked by the jostling of the intervening mob. I felt a hand on my arm, impeding my progress. “Hey, babe. You play pool?” I knew the voice. I turned and it was Tate.I could feel my heart do a flip-flop, fearing Raymond’s reaction. I glanced back at Bibianna automatically. She was squeezed into the booth, facing in my direction. She musthave recognized Tate about the time I did because her face seemed to pale.“Let’s just mosey over to the pool table,” Tate said under his breath. “Has Raymond figured out yet it was me killed Chago?”“If he did, you’d be a dead man. Dawna got picked up before she could tell him everything. Why don’t you get out while you can,” I murmured.Tate took my arm, moving me toward the pool table. “Aren’t you happy to see me?”I closed my eyes briefly. “Jesus, Tate. Get away from me. What are you doing here?”He took my hand. I was forced to follow as we crossed to the rack of pool cues, where I watched Tate select one. “I had to see Bibianna. She tell you about us?”“Of course. You could have told me yourself if you’d trusted me.”“Who had time? I’ve busy shooting bad guys.” He raised the cue to shoulder height and sighted down the length of it like a rifle. “Boom.”“How’d you know where we’d be?”“Pick a cue stick,” he said.I chose one at random, too distracted to be particular, not that I have a clue about the qualities of a good cue.“Not that one.” He handed me another cue stick and then continued casually. “This is Raymond’s hangout. You don’t have to be Sherlock Holmes to figure out where he’ll be. By the way, if Raymond comes over and wants to know what’s going on, tell him the truth-we went to grade school together.”“How’d you get out of the slammer? I thought you were broke. What’s bail on a murder charge, two hundred thousand bucks?”“Two fifty. I got a friend in Montebello who put up his house. My attorney got bail knocked down to a hundred grand. I’m out on OR plus bail....”“And they let you leave the county?”“Quit worryin. It’s legitimate. I talked my probation officer into an eight-hour turnaround. My wife’s sick, I said. I’m due back in Santa Teresa by six A.M. or they’ll throw me in the can again.” Tate arranged the balls in the rack and broke. Balls scattered everywhere with a satisfying crack.“What are we doing? I haven’t played pool for years.”“Eight-ball. It’s your shot.”“You’re very cute,” I said without much conviction. “Just tell me what to hit and let’s get on with it.”“You think I can have time alone with her?”“No.”“Would you give her a message? Would you tell her I’m doing everything I can to get her out of here?”“Sure.”We played pool. Jimmy Tate pretended to tutor me and I took instruction, all in the interest of conducting a tense conversation overlaid with bright smiles. From a distance, I hoped we’d look like potential bedmates to someone who would kill us if he figured out what was actually happening. Tate loved it, of course. This was just the sort of situation he thrived on-out there on the front line, taking flak, taking risks in the name of I don’t even know what. I was feeling that same sick sensation that prefaces a tetanus shot. Something bad was going to happen and I couldn’t figure out how to escape it.Tate said, “You taking good care of her for me?”“I’m a real champ,” I said. “This is the last time I’m ever doing shit like this for anyone.”He smiled. “That’s because you’d rather kick butt.”“You got that right.”Tate cleaned up the table and we joined the other three, who were bunched into the booth. Luis got up and I slid in beside Tate, who remained carefully attentive to me in the process. Luis found an empty chair and pulled it over to the table. I think it was the first time I ever served as a “beard” in a dangerous liaison. Liar that I am under ordinary circumstances, I found it a tricky business to fake a flirtation. I felt awkward and false, reactions not lost on Raymond, whose radar was telling him enemy aircraft were somewhere in the area. I felt his eyes scan my face with a half-formed question. Maybe he’d write me off as a hopeless social oaf. Certainly the woodenness of my response to Tate was obvious.Tate proceeded to tease me outrageously under Bibianna’s watchful gaze. She was feigning indifference, but her interest was obvious. Aside from the fact the situation scared me silly, I was glad to have Tate on the scene. I hadn’t realized, before he showed up, how isolated I was feeling. I was still vulnerable, of course-more so with him there-but at least I had a friend, and I knew, from my long experience, he’d lay down his life for me if it came to that.Bibianna, in range of Jimmy Tate again, began to do the ritual dance. There was nothing overt in her behavior. She went out of her way to cater to Raymond, tucking her arm in his, leaning against him so that her breast brushed his arm enticingly. She and Tate avoided eye contact, ignoring one another so pointedly I’d have thought them rude if I hadn’t known their true relationship. As it was, the game they played was far riskier. The color crept up in her cheeks unbidden. I watched the sexuality emerge, some ancient, unspeakable response to her mate. I couldn’t believe Raymond didn’t pick up on it. The only clue I had about his inner state was the eruption of the tics, which were running once a minute.He was clearly feeling territorial. Whether he was sensitive to what was actually going on or not, Tate was still a male, not only on Raymond’s turf, but in close proximity to his woman. Raymond seemed to swell, trying to engage Tate in a shoving match of boasts and braggadocio, a verbal pissing match. I don’t know what, among women, would constitute an equivalent. I tuned out the talk because it was all chest-thumping bullshit, fueled by alcohol and testosterone. I couldn’t even begin to compute what Tale’s response might be when he found out Bibianna was sleeping with Raymond. The whole situation might have amused me if I hadn’t been so eaten up with tension.Luis was watchful. The usual blank mask fell away and I saw, for the first time, a wily intelligence at work. Behind his dead eyes, a lively animal lurked, all the more dangerous for its cunning at concealment. The spark died. He slouched in his seat, flinging an arm across the back of the chair. He lifted his beer bottle by the neck and drank deeply. By the time he looked at me again, the arrogance was back, the superiority of the male lording it over lesser mortals.I thought the night would never end. The Spanish music was jarring, either loud and frenetic or emotionally oppressive. The air was cloudy with smoke and the smell of beer. The only thing I cared about was staying very close to Tate, whose sun-weathered face was the only refuge I could see. I made him dance with me, in part to keep him away from Raymond, who was no fool. In the stress of the moment, we all drank way too much. I’d be sick in the morning, but I didn’t care at this point. Maybe I could carve out a quiet life for myself on the bathroom floor, head hanging over the toilet bowl.We closed the place down at 2:00 A.M. Outside the bar, we parted company with Tate. I was just relieved to get out of the situation in one piece, with no fisticuffs, no confrontations, no tears. Luis left the three of us out in front of the apartment, peeling off in the Cadillac. I preceded Raymond and Bibianna up the stairs, waiting while Raymond unlocked the door and let us in. The dog lay in the doorway like a sentinel, lifting his heavy bony head to give me a look as I passed. At least he had the good grace not to growl.I went into my room and slipped into my nightie, then headed for the bathroom. The door to the master bedroom was closed. I knew from the way Raymond had been looking at Bibianna that his desires were at a peak again. In the interest of keeping peace, she was going to have to submit. I felt for her. What could be worse than making love to someone you didn’t want to be with, caught up in a situation that dictated intimacy? I washed my face and brushed my teeth, turned the bathroom light out, and padded barefoot into my room. I opened one of the windows and leaned out, gazing briefly along the street, first in one direction, then the other. No one was stirring. In the quiet of the hour, by the pale wash of moonlight, even poverty can look appealing. The shabbiness is cleansed, all the broken parts made whole. The concrete sidewalk seemed to glow with silver, the street a darker tone. A car passed, driven slowly. Jimmy Tate, perhaps? Was he wild with the notion of Bibianna in bed with someone else? I remembered Daniel, my second ex-husband, whose sexual betrayal had been a source of such anguish once. Later, after love dies, it’s hard to remember how it could have ever mattered so much.From the other room, I heard the muffled thumping as the king-size bed banged into the wall. I lifted my head, suddenly sobered by the realization that this was the perfect time to get some work done if I moved fast enough. I peeled off my nightie and pulled on some jeans. I yanked a T-shirt over my head and slipped my bare feet into Bibianna’s tennis shoes, which I tied in haste. I unlocked the sliding glass window and shoved it open, aluminum frame rasping in its track.The night air was cold and a light breeze whipped across my face. Below, the passageway between buildings looked dark and empty. I could smell smog and briny ocean in a heady mix. I boosted myself up onto the windowsill and scrambled out onto the metal landing between flights of stairs. The alcohol I’d consumed was acting as a sedative for any anxiety I might have felt. My heart was pumping hard and the effect was energizing. I was thrilled to be on the move again, excited to be looking at some action after all the enforced passivity.
