---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_010.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["bibianna", "u", "like", "said", "one", "got", "right", "woman", "officer", "turned", "cell", "looked", "get", "around", "call", "time", "name", "two", "door", "jail", "county", "side", "hand", "wall", "mattress"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/HIsforHomicideAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit010html

---


Unknown
Chapter 9EVEN WITH THE harsh lights playing on her face, that fine dusky skin looked almost luminous. Thick lashes, dark eyes, a wide mouth still lush with flame-red lipstick. How’d she keep the stuff on like that? Anytime I tried lipstick, it ended up on the rim of the first glass I drank from. Hers looked fresh and wet, lending color to her face. Despite the foul talk, her dark eyes glinted with amusement. “I can’t believe those guys get paid to stand around like that,” she remarked with a glance at me. “How are you holding up?”“I’ve been better. You have any idea where Dawna disappeared to?”“She probably went to call Raymond. Oh, man, he’s gonna have a fit when he finds out Chago’s dead.”“Who are they?”“Don’t ask.”“What’d you do to piss ’em off so bad?”“It’s what I didn’t do that counts.”“You owe ’em money?”“No way, baby! They owe me. What I can’t figure out is how they got a line on me in the first place. What’d you say your name was?”For a minute, I couldn’t remember which set of fake ID’s I’d brought. “Hannah Moore.”There was a calculated silence. “What’s the rest of it?”“The rest?”“You have a middle name?”“Oh. Sure,” I said. “Uhm, Lee.”Her tone of voice turned flat. “I don’t believe it.”I felt my heart do a quick flip, but I managed a noncommittal murmur.“I never met anyone with three pairs of double letters in their name. Two n’s in Hannah. Two e’s in Lee and the two o’s in Moore. Plus, ‘Hannah’ is a palindrome, spelled the same way forward as it is backward. You ever had your numbers done?”“Like numerology?”She nodded. “It’s a hobby of mine. I can do a chart for you later... all I need is your date of birth, but I can tell you right now, your soul number’s six. Like you’re big in domestic harmony, right? People like you, your mission is to spread the idea of the Golden Rule.”I laughed in spite of myself. “Oh, really. How’d you guess?”A uniformed officer, toting Bibianna’s handbag, moved over to the squad car and let himself in, locking eyes with me in the rearview mirror as he slammed the door shut. It was apparently his job to transport us out to the jail. He held the bag up. “This belong to one of you?”“Me,” Bibianna said, rolling her eyes in my direction. It was anybody’s guess whether the joint in her bag would come to light or not. She was in deep doo-doo if it did.He plunked the bag down on the seat beside him. “How you doin’ back there?” He was in his late twenties, cleanshaven, his dark hair clipped close. The back of his neck looked vulnerable above the collar of his uniform.None of this was lost on Bibianna. “We’re great, sport. How’re you?”“I’m cool,” he said.“You have a name?”“Kip Brainard,” he said. “You’re Diaz, right?”“Right.”He seemed to smile to himself. He started the car and eased it away from the curb, radioing the dispatcher that he was on his way in with us. There was no more conversation. The rain had begun to sound like a pile of nails being dropped on the car roof, windshield wipers flopping back and forth without much effect, the monotonous calls from the car radio punctuating the silence. We reached the freeway and headed north. The windows were fogging over. In the warmth of the vehicle and the lulling drone of the engine, I nearly nodded off.We took the off ramp at Espada and turned left onto the frontage road, proceeding about a half a mile. We turned right onto a road that cut around to the rear of the Santa Teresa County Correctional Facility, better known as the jail to those of us about to be incarcerated. On the far side of the property, the complex shared a parking lot with the Santa Teresa County Sheriff’s Department. We pulled up at the gate. Kip pushed a button for the intercom. The master control regulation officer responded, a disembodied female voice surrounded by static.“Police officer coming in with two,” he said.The gate swung open and we passed through. Once we were inside the fence, he honked the horn and the gate swung shut behind us. We pulled into a paved stretch enclosed by a chain-link fence. The whole area blazed with lights, the rain creating a misty aureole around each flood. A county sheriff’s car had pulled in just ahead of us, and we waited in silence until the deputy was admitted with his prisoner, a vagrant who was visibly drunk and much in need of assistance.Once they’d disappeared, Kip shut the engine off and got out. He opened the rear door on my side and helped me out, a clumsy procedure with my hands cuffed behind my back. “You gonna behave yourself?” he asked.“No problem. I’m fine.”He must not have trusted me because he continued to hold on to my arm, walking me around to Bibianna’s side of the car. He opened the door and helped her out of the backseat and then walked us toward the gate. A female jail officer came out to assist him. The rain was constant, unpleasant, a chill assault on my body, which was already trembling with accumulated tensions. Never had I so longed for a hot shower, dry clothes, my own bed. Bibianna’s dark hair was plastered to her head in long dripping strands, but it didn’t seem to bother her. All the earlier hostility had faded, replaced by a curious complaisance.Reception at the county jail is approached through an exterior corridor of chain-link fencing that resembles a dog run. We were buzzed in, passing yet another checkpoint complete with electronic locks and cameras. Kip walked us along the passage, raindrops splashing up around us as our heels tapped across the wet pavement. “You know the routine?” he asked.“Yeah, yeah, yeah. It’s all the same, stud,” Bibianna said.“Let’s make that ‘Officer.’ Can we do that?” he said dryly. “I take it you’re an old hand at this.”“You got that right... Officer Stud,” she said.He decided to let it pass. I kept my mouth shut. I knew the drill from the old days in uniform. It was odd how differently I perceived the whole process now that I was the perp.We reached a metal door. Kip pushed a button, announcing once more that he was bringing in two of us. We waited while the cameras inspected us. I’ve seen the big console where the MCR operator sits, surrounded by black-and-white monitors showing the equivalent of twelve totally boring Andy Warhol movies simultaneously. The operator buzzed us in. In silence, we walked down one corridor and then turned into a second, emerging eventually into the reception area where the male prisoners are booked in. I was hoping to see Tate, but he’d apparently been processed and taken to a cell. The vagrant, weaving on his feet, was emptying the pockets of his ragged sport coat. I knew him by sight, one of the town’s perennial characters. Most afternoons he hung out around the courthouse having heated arguments with an unseen companion. His invisible chum was still giving him a hard time. The booking officer behind the desk waited with benign patience. I knew the deputy, too, though I couldn’t remember his name. Foley, maybe. Something like that. I wasn’t close enough to read his name tag and I didn’t want to call attention to myself by squinting at his chest.I turned my head, staring off to the left to avoid any visual contact. It had been a good ten years since I’d last seen the guy, but I didn’t want to chance his recognizing me, blowing the cover I’d set up. I probably flatter myself.I looked as respectable as the bum they were booking. I fancied I smelled better, but perhaps not. I’ve noticed that most of us don’t have a clue what we smell like to other people. It’s almost as though our noses blank us out in self-defense.Kip buzzed at yet another locked door, and after a brief wait another female jail officer emerged from the women’s side. Bibianna and I had our pictures taken in the kind of booth you see in Woolworth’s, a sorry strip of poses appearing moments later in the outside slot. In mine, I looked like a suspect in a teen pomo ring, the kind of woman who’d lure the young girls with glib promises of modeling gigs. We moved into the women’s booking area, where we approached a row of holding cells. I went into the first and Bibianna the second. The officer with me did a quick pat-down and then removed the handcuffs.“Lean up against the wall,” she said. Her tone wasn’t unfriendly, but it was devoid of real warmth. And why not? I was just one more in an endless stream of jailbirds as far as she knew.I faced the wall, arms straight out in front of me, leaning my weight on my hands, which were spaced about four feet apart. She did a second, more thorough, pat-down, making sure I didn’t have any tiny lethal weapons concealed in my hair. She allowed me to take a seat on a bench along the wall while the proper papers were assembled at the counter to my right. When the booking officer was ready, I emptied my pockets, passing my phony driver’s license, my keys, my watch, my belt, and my scruffy shoes through the window slot. There was something pathetic about the sight of my personal possessions, which were not only meager, but cheap as well. We began to go through the catechism that accompanies the loss of freedom. Personal data. Medical.Employment. I said I was out of work, claiming “waitress” as my occupation. We went through the litany of facility and arrest data. I was being charged with assault, a misdemeanor, and battery on a police officer, which is a felony with a five-thousand-dollar bail attached. I assumed Bibianna was being booked on similar charges. I was offered the chance to post bail, but I declined, operating on the premise that Bibianna would do likewise. All I needed was to be stuck in jail while she found a way to get herself bailed out. I kept waiting for the booking officer to realize that my driver’s license was a fake, but she didn’t seem to notice. My few pieces of personal property were itemized and placed in a clear plastic boiling pouch, like a Seal-A-Meal. The whole procedure took about fifteen minutes and left me feeling unsettled. Oddly enough, I didn’t feel humiliated so much as I felt misunderstood. I wanted to assert myself, wanted to assure them that I wasn’t what I appeared to be, that I was really a decent, law-abiding citizen... on their team, in effect.The booking officer completed her process. “You want to make any calls, there’s a pay phone in the next cell.”“I can’t think who I’d call anyway,” I said, absurdly grateful that everyone was so polite. What had I expected, curses and abuse?Padding along in my sock feet, I was taken down the corridor to the ID bureau to be fingerprinted. A second set of photographs were taken, front and profile this time. At this rate, I could put together a little album for Mother’s Day. It was 2:13 A.M. by the time I was escorted to the drunk tank, a cell maybe fifteen by fifteen feet. A skinny white woman, with her back turned, slept on a mattress in the far comer of the room. There were no outside windows. The entire front wall was barred, with a lidless commode tucked into an alcove on the right. I’ve seen cells where the toilet seats are removed as well. I had to guess we were being trusted not to try to hang ourselves with this one. The floor was beige vinyl tile, the walls painted cinder block. There was a built-in bench running the width of the room with some one-inch mattresses rolled up and arranged haphazardly against the wall. I snagged one for myself and spread it out on the floor.Bibianna arrived moments later, along with two other prisoners, a black woman and a weeping white girl in formal dress.“Hey, Hannah,” Bibianna said. “Old home week. This is Nettie.” She turned to the second woman. “What’s your name, babycakes?”“Heather.”Bibianna said, “Heather, this is Hannah.”“Nice to meet you,” I murmured dutifully. I didn’t have a clue about jailhouse etiquette. The skinny woman in the far corner stirred restlessly in her sleep.Bibianna pulled a mattress off the bench and dragged it over toward me. “Nettie and me did a little county time about a month ago, right?” No response.Nettie, the black woman, looked to be in her late thirties. She was tall, with broad shoulders and breasts the size of torpedoes. Her hair was big and brushed over to the right, where the bulk of it stuck out stiffly as if blown by a hard wind. The black strands had a gray cast from all the split ends. She wore blue jeans, an oversize white T-shirt, and white crew socks. Bibianna arranged her mattress beside mine and took a seat, watching Nettie with respect. “She was charged with ‘attempt to inflict bodily injury’ and ‘assault with a deadly weapon.’ She attacked a wino with an uprooted palm tree. I guess it was a little one, but can you believe that?”The other inmate, the white girl, was scarcely more than twenty, wearing an ankle-length organza dress and a corsage on one wrist. She was crying so hard it was impossible to figure out what her story was. She sank in a huddle and buried her face in her hands. She and Nettie both reeked of booze. The black woman paced restlessly, staring at Heather, who kept wiping her nose on the hem of her dress. Finally, Nettie stopped pacing and nudged her with a foot.“What’s the matter with you, blubbering away like that? Hush up a minute and tell me what’s wrong here.”The girl lifted a tear-streaked face, blotchy with embarrassment. Her nose was pink, her makeup smeared, her fine, pale hair coming loose from a complicated arrangement on top that looked like it had been done professionally. There were little sprigs of baby’s breath tucked here and there like pale dried twigs. She paused to lick at a tear trickling toward her chin and then told a garbled tale of her boyfriend, a fight, being left penniless on the side of the freeway, too drunk to stand, picked up by a CHP cruiser and arrested on the spot. This was her twenty-first birthday and she was spending it in the county jail. She’d barfed on her dress, which she’d had on layaway for six months at Lerner’s. Her daddy was on the city council and she didn’t dare call home. By the time she got to this point, she burst into tears again.The skinny woman on the mattress made a muffled response. “B. F. D. Big fuckin’ deal.”Nettie, offended, turned on the woman, whom she apparently knew. She fired a dark look at the huddled form. “Mind your own business, bitch.” She patted Heather awkwardly, unaccustomed to mothering but identifying with her plight. “Poor sweet baby. That’s all right. That’s just fine. Now don’t you be upset. Everything’s going to be all right.... “I stretched out on my side, my head propped up on my hand. Bibianna had her back against the wall, her arms crossed for warmth. “What a crock of shit. People out there killing each other and they arrest someone like her. I don’t get it. Call her old man and have him come get her out of here. He’s going to call anyway once he figures out she’s not home.”“How come you’re so down on the police?” I asked.Bibianna ran a hand through her hair, giving it a toss. “They killed my pop. My mom’s Anglo. He was Latino. They met in high school and she was crazy about him. She gets knocked up and they got married, but it worked out okay.”“Why’d the cops kill him?”“It was just something dumb. He was in a little market and lifted something minor-a package of meat and some chewing gum. The store manager caught him and they got into a tussle. Some off-duty cop pulled his gun out and fired. All for a pack of ground beef and some Chiclets for me. What a waste. My mother never got over it. God, it was awful to watch. She married some guy six months later and he turned out to be a real shit, knockin’ her around. Talk about bad karma-the cops killed him, too. She’d kick him out. He’d disappear and then show up again, all contrite. Move in, take her money, beat the crap out of us. He’s drunk half the time, doing ‘ludes and coke, anything else he could get his hands on, I guess. If he wasn’t pawing at her, he was pawing at me. I cut him once, right across the face-nearly took his eye out. One night, he got caught breaking into an apartment building two doors away from us. He barricaded himself in the place with a twelve-gauge. The cops swarmed all over the neighborhood. Television crews. SWAT teams and tear gas. Cops shot him down like a dog. I was eight. It’s like how many times I gotta go through this, you know?”“Sounds like they did you a service on that one,” I said.Her smile was bitter, but she made no response.“Your mother still alive?”“Down in Los Angeles,” Bibianna said. “What about you? You got family somewhere?”“Not anymore. I’ve been on my own for years. I thought you were going to do my numbers,” I said.“Oh, yeah. What’s your birthday?”The date I was using on the fake ID was a match for mine. “May fifth,” I said, and gave her the year.“And me without a pencil. Hey, Nettie? You got something to write with?”Nettie shook her head. “Not unless you count Chap-Stick.”Bibianna shrugged. “What the hell. Look here.” She licked her finger and drew a big tic-tac-toe grid on the floor. She wrote the number 5 in the center and raised it to the third power. The lights in the cell were dim, but the floor was so grimy I could read the spit graph without squinting. She said, “This is great. See that? Five is the number of change and movement. You got three of them. That’s hot. You know, travel and like that. Growth. You’re the kind of person has to be out there doing things, moving. The zero out here means you don’t have any limits. You can do anything. Like whatever you tried, you’d be good at, you know? But it can scatter you. Especially with all these fives here. Makes it tough to pick the thing you want to do. You’d need to have the kind of job that would never be the same. Know what I mean? You have to be in the middle of the action.... “She looked at me for confirmation.“Weird,” I said, for lack of anything better.Nettie shot us a look. She had one arm around Heather, who had leaned against her for warmth. “We’re trying to get some sleep here. Could you keep it down?”“Sorry,” Bibianna said. She abandoned the reading and stretched out on the mattress, making herself comfortable. The gridwork she’d drawn seemed to glow in the half-light. The bulb in the cell remained bright, but we were reasonably warm. There was the sense of ongoing activity in the corridors beyond: a phone ringing, footsteps, the murmuring of voices, a cell door clanging shut. At intervals, the smell of cigarette smoke seemed to drift through the vents. Somewhere on the floor below us were the dormitory rooms that housed the fifty to sixty women doing county time in any given period. I could feel myself begin to drift. At least we were out of the rain and the bad guys couldn’t get us. Unless “they” were somebody locked in the cell with us. Now, there was a thought.“One good thing,” Bibianna murmured drowsily.“What’s that?”“They didn’t find that joint....”“You are one lucky chick.”After that, there was quiet except for the occasional rustling of clothes as one of us turned on the mattress. The skinny white woman began to snore softly. I lay entertaining warm thoughts about Bibianna, realizing that from here on out, I’d remember her as the person I first got jailed with, a form of female bonding not commonly recognized. I’d have felt a lot better if Jimmy Tate had come to our rescue, but I really wasn’t sure what he could have done to help. Right now, he was probably sitting in a cell over on the men’s side in roughly the same fix. Crazy Jimmy Tate and Bibianna Diaz, what a pair they made....
