---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_016.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["raymond", "car", "like", "could", "guy", "said", "right", "see", "got", "back", "going", "get", "want", "black", "look", "caddy", "little", "head", "make", "call", "money", "side", "insurance", "accident", "know"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/HIsforHomicideAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit016html

---


Unknown
Chapter 15MAC CAME ON the line. “Voorhies.”“Mr. Voorhies, my name is Hannah Moore. I have car insurance with your company and I wanted to check on my coverage.”There was dead silence. I knew he recognized my voice. Raymond leaned his head close to mine, angling the phone so he could listen to the conversation.Mac hesitated. I could hear him grope with the request, trying to figure out what was going on and what he could say without jeopardizing my situation, whatever that might be. He knew me well enough to realize I wouldn’t make such a call without a good reason. “Is this regarding an automobile accident?” he asked cautiously.“Well, no. I, uhm, might be driving a friend’s car and he doesn’t like the idea unless he knows I’m covered.” Raymond’s face was six inches away from mine. I could smell his after-shave and feel the warm, slightly adenoidal character of his breath.“I can understand that. Is your friend there now?” Mac asked.“That’s right.”“Do you have the policy number handy?”“Uh, no. But the agent is Con Dolan.”Raymond drew back and reached for a piece of paper, scratching out a note. “Ask about collision.” I hate it when people coach me when I’m on the phone. He pointed significantly. I waved at him with irritation.“Uh, it’s really the collision I need to know about,” I amended.Another awkward pause. I smiled at Raymond wanly while Mac cleared his throat. “I tell you what I’ll do, Miss...”“Moore.”“Yes, all right. Why don’t I see if I can get in touch with Mr. Dolan. He’s no longer with the company, but I’m sure he’s still in town. I can check our files for the coverage and get back to you. Is there a number where you can be reached this afternoon?”Raymond pulled his head back and put a finger to his lips.I said, “Not really. I’m staying with this guy in Los Angeles, but I’m not sure how long I’ll be here. I could call again later if you’ll tell me what time.”“Try five this afternoon. I should have the information by then.”“Thanks. I’d appreciate it.” I handed Raymond the receiver and he hung it up.“What’d he say?”“He’s going to check. I’m supposed to call him back this afternoon at five.”“But as far as you know the insurance is in effect.”“I told you it was.”Raymond and Luis exchanged a look. Raymond looked over his shoulder at Bibianna, still intent on her game of solitaire. “Get your jacket. We’re going out.” And then to me. “You need a jacket? She’ll give you one.”“What’s happening?”“We’re going on a drive-down.”“Whatever that is,” I said.We took Sepulveda Boulevard up to Culver City, with Luis at the wheel. Bibianna was being sullen, sitting silently in the backseat with her arms crossed while Raymond either made calls on the car phone or rubbed, petted, and generally annoyed her, rambling on about all the money he meant to make, all the things he’d done, and all the big plans he had for the two of them. I had to give that guy some lessons. He was going about this all wrong. Aside from the fact that (unknown to him) she was already Mrs. Jimmy Tate, she was never going to tumble to all the smoke he was blowing. Women don’t want to sit around listening to guys talk about themselves. Women like to have conversations about real things, like feelings-namely, theirs. Raymond seemed to think he just hadn’t persuaded her yet of the depth of his affection. I wanted to scream, “She knows that, you dummy! She just doesn’t give a shit.” We pulled up at the first address. The ’79 Caddy was parked at the curb, a black Seville, being offered by a muscular black guy with a pink shower cap, a tattooed teardrop on his cheek, and a gold hoop through his left ear. Honestly, I’m not making this stuff up. He wore a T-shirt and low-slung jeans, with his Calvin Kleins sticking out above his belt. He was actually very cute with a mustache and goatee, a mischievous smile, and a little space between his teeth. Bibianna stayed in the car, but I got out and stood around with the guys, shifting from foot to foot while the three of them entered into a long and tedious negotiation. Raymond went through several sequences of ticcing, but the black guy didn’t react except to stop making eye contact. I could see that in some circles, Raymond would be treated like a walking basket case. I wanted to speak up protectively and say, “Hey, the guy can’t help it, okay?”The OBO turned out to be a hundred dollars less than the $999 listed in the paper. Raymond turned his body slightly and took out a fat cylinder of bills with a rubber band wrapped around them. He slipped the rubber band over his wrist while he peeled off the right denominations. The pink slip was signed and changed hands, but I couldn’t believe Raymond was actually going to take it down to the DMV. Habitual criminals never seem to be troubled about things like that. They do anything they please while the rest of us feel compelled to play by the rules.The black guy strolled off as soon as the transaction was completed. Raymond and Luis made a study of the car, which seemed to be in reasonable shape. Chrome flakes were peeling off the bumper and the right rear taillight had been smashed. The tires were bald, but the body didn’t show any major dents. The interior was gray, a rip in the passenger seat neatly sutured with black thread. The floor, front and back, was littered with fast-food containers, empty soft drink cans, crushed cigarette packs, newspapers. Luis took a few minutes to shove it all into the gutter, emptying the ashtray in a little mountain of cigarette butts.“What do you think?” Raymond asked me.I couldn’t imagine why my opinion mattered. “Looks better than anything I ever drove.”He stuck a finger in the key ring and flipped the keys into his palm. “Hop in. Bibianna goes with him.”I glanced over at the dark green Ford where Bibianna sat. She was perched up on the backseat, using the rearview mirror to braid her dark, glossy hair. “Fine with me,” I said.I got into the Caddy.Raymond got in on the driver’s side and slipped his seat belt on. “Buckle up,” he said. “We’re going to have an accident.”“Is this car insured? We just bought the damn thing,” I said with surprise.“Don’t worry about that stuff. I can call my agent later. He does anything I want.”I buckled up, trying to picture myself in a neck brace.The transmission was automatic. The car had power locks and power brakes, power windows. Raymond started the engine, which thrummed to life. He adjusted the rearview mirror and waited while a silver Toyota passed at cruising speed before he pulled into the lane of traffic.I tried the power windows, which went up with a quiet hum. “How do we do this?” I asked.“You’ll see.”We seemed to drive randomly, taking Venice Boulevard through Palms, turning right on Sepulveda into an area called Mar Vista. These were neighborhoods of small stucco bungalows with small yards and tired trees with leaves that were oxygen-starved from all the smog in the air. Raymond watched the streets like a cop looking for the telltale indications of a crime in progress.“What makes this a drive-down?”“That’s just what we call it when we’re out cruising for an accident. Car’s called a bucket. I got a fleet of buckets, a whole crew of drivers doing just what we’re doing. You’re a ghost.”I smiled. “Why’s that?”“Because you don’t get paid, therefore you don’t exist.”“How come I don’t get paid?”“You’re a trainee. You’re just here to beef up the head count.”“Oh, thanks,” I said. I turned and looked out the window on the passenger side. “So, what are we looking for?”Raymond glanced at me sharply, suspicion etched in his “I’m just trying to learn,” I said.“A victim. We call ’em vies,” he replied in belated answer to my question. “Somebody running a stop sign, backing out of a drive into the right-of-way, pulling out of a parking space...”“And then what?”He smiled to himself. “We hit the guy. You want to catch the rear quarter panel because the damage shows up nice and nobody gets hurt.”We drove around for an hour, unable to conjure up a traffic offender for the life of us. I could see that Raymond was impatient, but oddly enough, there was no twitching whatever during the time in the car. Maybe work was soothing to his battered nervous system. “Let me try,” I said.“You serious?”“If I score, I want the money. What’s it pay?”“A hundred bucks a day.”“You’re full of shit. I bet you make a fortune and I want a fair shake.”“Pushy bitch,” he said mildly.We traded places. I took a moment to slide the front seat a little closer to the gas pedal and the brake. I eased the Caddy into traffic. By then, we’d worked our way up Lincoln Boulevard to the outskirts of Santa Monica. At Pico, I cut left, picking up Ocean Avenue at San Vicente. Raymond hadn’t paid much attention, but when he saw the direction I was taking, he looked at me with surprise. “What’s wrong with Venice?”“Why not Beverly Hills?” I asked. At first the idea seemed to unsettle him, but he could see the possibilities. We worked our way up to Sunset Boulevard and headed east, passing the northern perimeter of the sprawling UCLA campus. Just past the Beverly Hills Hotel, I took a right onto Rexford. I found it soothing to cruise along the wide tree-lined streets. This was an area known as the “flats” of Beverly Hills. The houses were oversize and filled the lots from side to side. All the lawns were green, the shrubs trimmed, gardeners blowing errant leaves down the driveways. Shade trees were planted along the grassy stretch between sidewalk and street, sycamores interspersed with oaks. High fences shielded the backyard tennis courts from sight. Now and then, I caught a glimpse of a swimming pool and cabana. The stoplight at Santa Monica Boulevard was green. I drove the Caddy sedately into the heart of the Beverly Hills shopping district.Technically, I knew I was skating on thin ice with this drive-down. The only thing I remembered about undercover work from police academy days is that it’s against “public policy” for an officer of the law to participate in the commission of a crime or incite someone to do so. Happily, I wasn’t actually an officer of the law, and if it ever came right down to it, it would be Raymond’s word against mine. Helping Raymond stage a few fraudulent accidents seemed to me the quickest way to persuade him I was on the up-and-up.Raymond stared out the window, his manner uneasy. “You’re never going to find any business up here.”“Want to bet?” I had just spotted a late-model Mercedes pulling out of a parking lot in the middle of the block, left turn signal blinking. The car was a four-door sedan, a conservative black with a vanity plate that read BULL MKT. The woman driving was probably forty years old, with a cap of blond hair and big round sunglasses pulled down toward the tip of her nose. I slowed the Caddy, mentally apologizing for my sins in advance. I came to a full stop and politely waved her out. She gave me a quick wave and a smile, showing perfect caps. “What are you doing!”“Yielding the right-of-way,” I said with innocence. As soon as the Mercedes eased into my path, I gunned the Caddy and rammed the left rear quadrant with a thump. It was just like bumper cars and I felt the same sick charge, half guilt, half thrill. The indentation was nicely placed. The woman shrieked and turned to look at me openmouthed with astonishment.Raymond was out of the Caddy in a flash. “What the fuck are you doing? You pulled out right in front of us!” I got out and moved to the front of the Caddy, where I checked the broken headlight and flaking bumper. Not bad. The damage to the other car was six grand at least. The blonde had recovered from her initial dismay. She got out of the Mercedes and slammed the car door. She was dressed for tennis, little white skirt, green-and-white-striped Polo shirt, long, tan legs, little socks with jaunty green pompoms sticking out above her spotless white tennis shoes. The Mercedes’s left rear quadrant, recently a pristine shiny black, now sported a dent of substantial proportions, fender crumpled, chrome sticking out like a horizontal antenna. The rear door would have to be pried open with a crowbar. I could see the color rising in her face as she surveyed the damage. She turned and jabbed an angry finger in my face. “You fucking asshole! You sat there and motioned me out!”“She did not!” Raymond said.“She did, too!”“Did not,” I inserted to show where my loyalties lay.Raymond said, “Look at my car! We just bought this car and now look what you’ve done!”“Your car! Look at mine!”I put a hand against my neck and Raymond turned to me with concern.“Are you okay, hon?”“I guess so,” I said without conviction. The neck roll I did was accompanied by a wince.Raymond dropped his irate manner and substituted an air of studied calm that was more effective in its way. “Lady, I hope you got good insurance coverage....”The afternoon was marked by Raymond’s intermittent demolition derby, surreal in its fashion, depressing in its effect. We backtracked from Beverly Hills into Brentwood, through Westwood, and then south into Santa Monica again. We sought out areas congested with traffic, watched for minor violations, inattentiveness, and lapses in judgment. Raymond kept a meticulous record of each accident we staged-four in all-noting time and location, the other driver’s name and insurance company.The Caddy performed like a first-rate battering ram, sustaining very little damage for the losses we inflicted on other unsuspecting motorists. The victims seemed so gullible somehow, distressed, apologetic, sometimes irate, but usually worried they’d be slapped with ruinous lawsuits. I played my part-righteous and upset, pretending sudden shooting pains in my neck or back-but I couldn’t bear to look at them. This was not a kind of cheating I did very well, and I could proceed only by employing the same mental detachment I adopt when I enter a morgue. Raymond, of course, was only interested in filing phony claims for vehicular damage and whatever injuries we could fake as a consequence. His skills at manipulation were honed by long practice.At four, much to my relief, he decided we’d done enough. I’d been at the wheel for the first couple of accidents. Then Raymond had taken over. He found an on ramp for the 405 and headed south, toward the apartment. I felt like a traveling salesperson, on the road with my boss. My questions to Raymond had the same banal thrust you’d imagine from a Fuller Brush trainee. “What’s your background for this?” said I, much as if I were inquiring about his qualifications for a career with Encyclopaedia Britannica.“Some guy taught me the business when I was first starting out. He’s in the slammer, so it’s my operation.”“Like a promotion.”“Yeah, right. Exactly. I got a stable of doctors and attorneys who do the actual paperwork. I’m strictly supervision. Times are slow I do a little work like this. I like to keep a hand in.”“Your job is what, supplying the claimants?”“Well, yeah. What do you think we been doing all afternoon? Right now, I got a crew of ten, but that goes up and down. It’s hard to get good help.”I laughed. “I bet.”“I’ll tell you a little secret. And this is the key to sound business management. Be careful of the guy right below you on the pyramid. You don’t tell him jackshit.”“Because he might want to take over?”“That’s right. He’s the dude wants to put a knife in your back. You take Luis. I love the guy like a brother, but certain things I don’t tell him, people he doesn’t see. That way I don’t have to worry, know what I mean?”“The money must be good.”Raymond shook his head. “Are you kidding? The money’s great. I make maybe a thousand a case, depending on the nature of the ‘injury.’ The GP or the chiropractor probably clears another fifteen hundred.”“God, that’s amazing. What do they do, pad the fees?”“Sometimes they do. Or they charge for services never rendered. The insurance company doesn’t know the difference, and either way, the doc makes out. Plus, you have the attorney on top of that,” he said. He smiled wryly. “Of course, the biggest chunk goes to me.”“Because you take all the risks?”“Because I put up all the dough. Bankroll the cars, pay all the cappers up front. I probably shell out five or six grand per crew to get ’em rolling. Multiply that by ten, twenty crews working seven days a week? It adds up.”“Sounds like it,” I said, and let the subject drop.A long silence followed. I still didn’t have a fix on the mental arithmetic, but the money was clearly huge. I laid my head back against the seat. It wasn’t hard to see the appeal. For a guy like Raymond, the money was a lot better than an honest day’s work. Hell, I could make more money crashing cars than I did as a P. I. Of course, there was a downside. With all the bumps, smacks, and minor episodes of whiplash, my head was pounding and my neck was seizing up. I massaged the muscles along one shoulder, feeling tense.“What’s the matter?”“My neck’s stiff.”“You and me both,” he said in a moment of self-mockery. He looked at me closely. “For real?”“Raymond, we’ve just been in four auto accidents! That last one we had, I nearly slid off the seat. You could have warned me.”“You want to see a doctor? I can set it up. Heat treatments, ultrasound, anything you want. It’s one of the perks.”“Let me see how I feel when we get back to the apartment. Where’s Bibianna? I hope I’m not the only one out here risking my neck.”“Her and Luis are doing a drive-down same as us.”“Good. I’m glad to hear it.”He looked over at me, trying to gauge my mood. “You like it so far?”“It sure beats working for a living.”He flashed a smile, eyes returning to the road. “Doesn’t it?”We stopped briefly at Buddy’s Auto Body Shop across the street and two doors down from the apartment where Raymond lived. The garage itself sat in one corner of a property that extended from street to street. In the far corner, there was a corrugated metal shack surrounded by chassis, fenders, bumpers, engines, tires. A dilapidated chain-link fence enclosed maybe two full acres of wrecked cars and assorted parts. A sign read:BUDDY’S AUTO SALVAGEOPEN 6 DAYSTOP $$FOR YOUR CAR OR TRUCK.ONE OF THE LARGEST SELECTIONS OF USED PARTS IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.A big black rottweiler, with a head as craggy as a tree stump, was asleep in the dirt beside a pickup truck.I said, “Does Buddy work for you?”“I’m Buddy. Guy runs the place is Chopper. Back in a minute,” he murmured as he got out. Raymond apparently operated his “repair” business in conjunction with an auto wrecking and salvage company, probably dismantling vehicles once he’d maximized the insurance potential.I waited until he went into the garage and then I got out myself and ambled over to the Pepsi machine just inside the door. I took my time tucking coins in the slot, extracting a can of Diet Pepsi. I popped the top and downed it, idly taking in my surroundings. There was not another soul in sight and no indication of any work being done. The late afternoon sun slanted onto the cracked concrete floor in tawny yellow strips. The air smelled of oil, old tires, and hot metal. A pyramid of bright blue metal barrels had been laid on their sides and served now as storage bins for a jumble of rusted car parts. I could see Raymond through the open doorway of an area marked off as office space. The flat-roofed building appeared to be converted from a very small stucco house. Additional office space was provided by a single-wide trailer tucked between the fence and the building. The horizontal panes of a pair of dusty louvered windows were slanted open to let in some air. A wooden pallet was leaning up against the trailer. There was an alarm company sign affixed to the side of the trailer, but I didn’t take it seriously. This didn’t look like an establishment famous for its security.Raymond finished his business and emerged from the garage with a guy at his side whom he introduced as Chopper. He was an Anglo in his forties, balding and squat. His breathing was labored and his face freckled with sweat.I said, “Great dog,” hoping to ingratiate myself with his owner.“That’s Brutus.” Chopper gave a piercing whistle and Brutus awoke obligingly and lumbered to his feet. The poor dog was ancient, so crippled by arthritis that he walked with a rocking motion, approaching by degrees. Up close, I could see his black hair was dusted with white. He paused beside me, his manner humble. I put my hand down near his nose and he licked me. I felt embarrassingly dewy-eyed about the damn beast.Raymond and Chopper finished their business and we walked on back to the apartment building, leaving the car where it was.
