---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_007.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - H Is for Homicide A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["jimmy", "bibianna", "way", "said", "like", "one", "time", "know", "back", "going", "eye", "u", "hand", "face", "tate", "year", "never", "seemed", "would", "woman", "dance", "still", "heard", "much", "smile"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/HIsforHomicideAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit007html

---


Unknown
Chapter 6I FOLLOWED HER into the crowd like a rookie soldier into battle. Male eyes surveyed us from head to toe, grading us according to the size of our tits, how much butt we had hanging out, and how available we seemed. Bibianna netted a lot of mouth noises, a hand gesture, and some disgusting propositions which she seemed to find amusing, tossing casual insults at the guys most vocal in their appreciation. She was easygoing, good-natured, with a quick, infectious laugh.The music started up again and she began to dance as she walked, snapping her fingers, working her way through the crowd with an occasional crotch-activating bump and grind. She was scanning faces and I wondered who she was looking for. It didn’t take long to find out. Her animation kicked up a notch, like the sudden surge in electric current preceding a blackout. Her body seemed to suffuse with a palpable heat.“Stick around,” she said. “I’ll be back.”A blond guy separated himself from the pack of studs at the bar. He was curly haired, with wire-rimmed glasses, a mustache, strong chin, a slight smile turning up the corners of his mouth. I found myself making note of his physical characteristics like a beat cop on patrol at the sight of a suspect. I knew the guy. He was of medium height, broad shoulders, narrow hips, dressed in jeans and a tight-fitting black Polo shut with short sleeves pushed up by well-developed biceps. Tate. Crazy Jimmy. How many years had it been since I’d seen him? He looked at Bibianna possessively, his thumbs tucked into his belt loops so that his hands seemed to bracket the bulge in the front of his pants. His manner was tempered with self-mocking, an irresistible blend of humor and awareness. I watched, as he moved in her direction, already engaging her in some kind of wordless foreplay. No one else seemed to be aware of them. They approached the dance floor from adjacent sides, meeting somewhere in the middle as if every move were choreographed. This was mating behavior.A table opened up and I snagged one of the empty chairs, putting my jacket across the back of the chair beside me to ward off any poachers. By the time I looked back at the dance floor, I’d lost sight of Bibianna, but I caught a flash of her red dress in the pulsating mass of dancers and occasional glimpses of her partner’s face. I had known him in another context altogether, and I couldn’t quite reconcile the incongruity of my past perception of him with the setting in which I now saw him. His hair had been shorter then and the mustache was new, but the aura was the same. Jimmy Tate was a cop-probably an ex-cop by now if the rumors were correct. Our paths had crossed the first time in elementary school-fifth grade, where for half a year we were soulmates, bound by a pact we’d sealed by touching tongues. Solemn stuff. Jimmy was into what they call “acting out.” I’m not sure what had happened to his parents, but he’d lived in foster homes all his life, getting kicked out of first one, then another. He was a kid who’d been labeled “incorrigible” by the age of eight, rebellious, prone to fistfights and bloody noses. He was frequently truant, and since I was given to truancy myself back then, we formed an odd bond. In many ways I was a timid child, but I had a wild streak of my own born of grief at the loss of my parents when I was five. My mutiny originated in fear, Jimmy’s in rage, but the net result was the same. I could see that under his defiance, there was such pain and such sweetness. I may even have loved him in my own innocent, prepubescent way. He was twelve years old to my eleven when I met him, a bewildered boy who had no concept of self-control. More than once he came to my defense, beating the snot out of some bullying fifth-grade boy who’d tried pushing me around. I could still recall the exhilaration I felt every time we raced away from the schoolyard, giddy with freedom, knowing how short-lived our liberation would be. He introduced me to cigarettes, tried getting me high on aspirin and Coke, showed me the difference between boys and girls. I can still remember the mix of mirth and pity I felt when I realized all boys were afflicted with a doo-dad that looked like an ill-placed thumb stuck between their legs. Eventually, Jimmy’s foster mother declared him out of control and sent him back to wherever it was unwanted kids were sent in those days. Juvenile hall, I guess. I didn’t see him for eight years, and then I was astonished when he showed up my first day at the police academy. By then, his toughness had a manic edge. He was a pretty boy and a boozer, out until all hours. How he got accepted into the academy, I’ll never know. Candidates are put through rigorous psychological evaluation, at which point the unsuitable and the unstable are quickly eliminated. He must have eluded the wily probing of his examiners, or maybe he was one of those rare individuals whose personality flaws don’t show up under scrutiny. His academy grades were usually borderline, but he never missed a class and his competitive nature kept him in the game. He was savvy enough to turn the heat down when he had to, but he never kept himself in check for long. He did manage to graduate with the rest of us, but he was always skirting disaster in some form. I’d kept my distance, too invested in my own career at that point to risk the taint of his reputation.He’d applied for a job with Santa Teresa Police department at the same time I did, but he’d been turned down. I lost track of him for a while and then I heard he’d joined the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department. Word of his exploits started leaking back to us. In bars after hours, the talk would start, cops trading tales about the crazy things Jimmy Tate had done. He was the kind of officer you wanted next to you any time there was trouble. In a pinch, he was absolutely fearless, oblivious of danger. In a pissing contest with the “bad guys,” he was right out in front. His aggression seemed to generate a force field around him, a protective shield. Other cops had told me that watching him under fire, you became aware that in his own way, he was as dangerous as “they” were-the bank robbers, the dopers, gang members, snipers, all the lunatics who had it in for us law-and-order types. Unfortunately, his ferocity pushed him across the line more than once. I gathered he did things you didn’t talk about later-things you pretended you hadn’t seen because he’d saved your life and you owed him. Eventually, he was tapped as part of a special investigating unit put together to monitor the activities of known criminals. Six months later, the section was disbanded after a series of questionable shootings. Twelve officers were suspended, Jimmy Tate among them. All were reinstated after review by the police commission, but it seemed clear it was only a matter of time before something blew in a big way.Two years ago, I’d come across his name in the L. A. Times. He’d been reassigned to a narcotics unit and had just been indicted, along with six other deputies, in a money-skimming scandal that was rocking the department. The details were spelled out day after day during preliminary hearings. Five of the six were bound over for trial and one of those blew his brains out. I followed the court proceedings in occasional copies of the L. A. Times, though I never heard the outcome. It wouldn’t have surprised me to learn he was guilty as charged. He was reckless and self-destructive, but as odd as it sounds, I knew if I’d had a brother, I’d have wanted him to be exactly like Jimmy Tate, not for his conduct and the dubious underlying morality, but because of his loyalty and his passionate commitment to survival. We live in a society piously concerned about the rights of criminals when their victims’ lives have been trashed without any consideration of the price in pain and suffering. With Jimmy Tate in charge, believe me, justice was served. There simply wasn’t much attention paid to the technicalities involved.He and Bibianna came off the dance floor. The band was taking a break and the noise level dropped so fast it was almost like turning deaf. I focused on Jimmy’s face, knowing any minute he’d spot me and the recognition would leap in his eyes. The two of them sat down at the table, and Bibianna pulled her hair up with one hand and fanned her bare neck with the other. She was winded, laughing, the color high in her cheeks, her hair damp at the temples where the dark strands had separated into little tendrils. “This’s the woman I was telling you about, came to look at my place,” she said to him, indicating me. “What’d you say your name was?”Jimmy’s smile was polite as his gaze traveled from her face to mine. I held a hand out.“Hello, Jimmy. I’m Hannah Moore,” I said. “You remember me?”Clearly he did, and I knew from his look my real name was attached to the recollection. Whatever his current status, he was still too thoroughly trained as a cop to blow my cover. He smiled as he took my hand, dosing me with the same low-voltage sexuality he turned on Bibiana. He lifted my hand to his mouth, kissing my knuckle affectionately. “God, babe. How are you? It’s been years,” he said.“You two know each other?” she asked.He returned my hand to me reluctantly. “We were in grade school together,” he said without pause, and I felt myself flush with pleasure since that was the connection I cared about. The academy and whatever happened after that was the stuff of our grown-up years. The other had a magical quality that would always take precedence in my book.He pulled a crumpled bill out of his pants pocket with a glance at Bibianna before his eyes returned to my face. “I need some cigarettes, doll. Can you do me that?”She hesitated just long enough to let him know her cooperation was a gift. Her smile was underlined with irony and the look she gave me was knowing. She tucked the bill between her breasts and walked away without a word. Jimmy’s gaze traced a loving line up her legs to her hips. She was moving with the self-conscious thrust and sway of a model or a starlet, aware of her effect. She sent a slow smile back to him, puckering her mouth in a gesture that was half pout, half promise.I felt a laugh bubble up. “I can’t believe running into you this way,” I said. “How do you know Bibianna?”He smiled. “I met her in L. A. at a Halloween party a year ago. I saw her a couple times down there, then ran into her again up here.”“I had no idea you were back. What have you been up to?”“Not much,” he said. His eyes flicked across my face as he checked me out. “How about yourself? Last I heard you’d left the department and were working for some agency.”“I was. I got licensed. Now I work for myself. Are you still with the L. A. County Sheriff’s?”“Not exactly.”“What ‘exactly’ are you doing? Last I heard you were being tried for theft,” I said.“She’s something, isn’t she?” he said, avoiding my question.“What’s the story, Jimmy?”He propped his chin on his fist, smiling at me with his eyes. “I’m retired. I sued the shit out of them-ten million bucks.”“You sued them?” I said. “What about the charges?”My reaction seemed to amuse him and I watched him shrug. “I was acquitted. That’s the way the system works. Sometimes you get the bear, sometimes the bear gets you. I’d been on medical leave, collecting disability for job-related pain and stress. Next thing I know, there’s a bunch of us charged with conspiracy, money laundering, income tax evasion, God knows what else. They put us through hell and by the time I got from under that, all my benefits were cut and I was being asked to resign. Forget that. No way. I found a lawyer and filed suit.”“After you were cleared?”“Shit, yes. I’m not going to let them get away with that. The way they see it, I got off on a technicality. I was the only one acquitted, but I still did the whole nine yards the same as the others, so why am I being penalized twice? A jury said I was innocent.’“Were you?”“Of course not, but that’s not the point,” he said. “The prosecution had a shot at me and couldn’t make it stick, so now I’m off the hook. Doesn’t matter if I did it or not. Court says I’m clear, I’m clear. That’s the law.”“So they fired you?”“In effect. What they did was they axed my disability. They decided I was trouble and they wanted me outta there, which is why they cut my benefits. Said I had an attitude. No way I was going to put up with that, so I sued their asses off. We just settled last week. Seven hundred and fifty thou. Of course, when the check comes through, my attorney’s going to take his cut off the top, but I’m still going to end up with three sixty-five. My retirement fund. Pretty good, yes?”“That’s great.”“Meantime, I’m flat broke, but what are you going to do?”“What about Bibianna? Does she know you’re a cop?”“Does she know you’re a P. I.?”I shook my head to one side, his smile fading as he saw my expression shift. “You’re not investigating her?”I didn’t answer, which was answer enough.“What for?” he asked.I figured I might as well level with him. He’d find a way to get it out of me eventually. “Insurance fraud,” I said, watching for his reaction. If I’d hoped to surprise him, I was out of luck.“Who are you working for?”“California Fidelity.”“Can you make a case?”“Probably. By the time I’m done, at any rate,” I said.He looked away from me then, eyes straying toward the jukebox. I followed the line of his gaze, catching sight of Bibianna. A rainbow of lights played across her face. There was something about her-a dusky beauty, a physical perfection, that must have been irresistible, judging by the way he watched her. I saw her throw her head back and laugh, though the sound didn’t carry. She was flirting with the drummer, one hand resting lightly on his arm in a gesture both intimate and casual. The drummer was tall and skinny with a face like a collie, his eyes close together and glittering with chemical substances the human body doesn’t manufacture naturally. He was staring at her breasts, probably emitting the high-pitched, hopeful whine of a pup hoping for a Milk-Bone. She wasn’t looking at us, but every phrase in her body language conveyed her awareness of Jimmy. Tit for tat, as it were. She turned to the jukebox and dropped in some coins, making her selection carelessly. After a moment, the pounding began, some popular song that was all bass and percussion. Bibianna moved out onto the dance floor with the drummer in tow. He was practically wetting himself, he was so excited by her attention.“I always hated undercover,” Jimmy said, raising his voice to be heard. He was still watching Bibianna, who’d begun to move with the beat, pelvis rolling like she was doing aerobic exercises to develop her glutes.I took a sip of my beer, making no response. I’d never actually done undercover work myself, but I’d heard plenty, none of it good.His eyes came back to mine. “Tell her what you’re up to,” he said.“And blow this? You’re crazy. I’m not going to do that. And you better not tell her, either. This is my turf.”“I understand that.”“Then what’s the hesitation, Jimmy? I know that look.”“I’m crazy about this lady and I don’t want to see her hurt. I’ve been telling her for months she’s going to get caught. If she knows you’re on to her, she’ll clean up her act.”“That’s not my concern. She filed a fraudulent claim with CF, and God knows how many phony claims she’s filed with other carriers. I’m going to turn her ass in.”“She’s getting out of the business.”“I’ll bet.”“No, she really is. She filed that claim months ago, but I talked her out of it. She’s going straight, I swear.”“Dream on, Tate. Why not drop the claim, then, if she wants out?”“She did.”“Bullshit! She’s got a request for payment pending right this minute. I saw the damn thing myself. She’s sticking it to us, putting the pressure on for a quick settlement. That’s why the case was passed to me in the first place.”“I don’t believe it.”“Ask her.”His smile was pained. “I can’t very well do that without telling her what’s going on.”“Then you better find a way around it before I wrap this thing up.”“There’s more here than meets the eye.”“There’s always more than meets the eye. It’s usually crooked,” I replied.Jimmy’s troubled gaze strayed back to Bibianna. He watched her with absorption, rubbing his thumb across his lower lip. He didn’t want to believe me. His infatuation with the girl (and that’s what she was, a girl) had apparently clouded his perception. After years of dealing with scammers, he’d suddenly decided that this one could change her wicked ways like magic if it suited her. He’d forgotten just how addictive crime can be. Repeat offenders are motivated more by withdrawal symptoms than necessity.I’d never seen him caught up like this. In the past, his relationships with women had been easy to track, light-hearted forays with no emotional strings attached. A few laughs, some quick sex, a couple of weeks of companionship. I’m not sure how it appeared from their perspective. The women he dated were often smart but self-deluding, announcing up front that all they were looking for was fun and games when in fact they bonded with him at the drop of a hat and quickly shifted into emotional bait and switch. The turnabout became apparent in the way they looked at him, in their determination to be understanding, nonpossessive, compliant, and considerate. I’d watched eight or ten of these women pass through his life in a period of ten months. All were slim, attractive, bright, and competent-professional women with careers in advertising, sales, graphic arts, TV production. Each would become fixated, hooked by his availability, his casual charm, the sexuality that hovered in the air around him. They’d begin to service him, cooking meals, ironing shirts, subtly demonstrating how much better his life could be if they were somewhere on the premises. They’d begin to quiz him about his past relationships, trying to figure out what the last woman did wrong, trying to delete from their own behavior the qualities that had generated their predecessor’s demise. This phase was brief because Jimmy’s behavior would remain exactly the same throughout. Personal sacrifice netted these women nothing except, perhaps, a case of housemaid’s knee. He was irresponsible, as promiscuous as ever, though he tried to be polite. He never flaunted his indiscretions, but he made no secret of them, either, since nonexclusivity was the agreement he and this latest girlfriend had started out with. Their anger would begin to surface because there was no payoff to the subservience. Each woman, in turn, would start to feel victimized, and Jimmy was the obvious target of the discontent. This, of course, provided him with the perfect justification to pull away from them. Within a month, never much more than two, they’d make some demand, perhaps complain, voicing barely controlled expressions of disappointment and rebuke. The minute that happened, Jimmy Tate was out the door without so much as a “Thank you, ma’am.” I’d never seen him look at one of them the way he looked at Bibianna Diaz.She returned to the table, where she arranged herself provocatively on Jimmy’s lap, straddling him, with her skirt hiked up to her crotch, her breasts so close to his face I thought he’d munch on them like cupcakes. I spent the next half hour having my hearing impaired by the music while Jimmy Tate and Bibianna Diaz exchanged steamy glances, (more or less) making love in an upright position with then-clothes on, the resulting friction scorching all the layers of fabric between them. The air smelled of desire, like the sweet perfume of wet grass after a rainstorm. That or cat spray.The band finished one number and began the next, the only slow song I’d heard all night. Bibianna went off to dance with someone else. Jimmy didn’t seem to mind. The fact that other men in the bar were seeking out her company apparently lent him stature. It also gave me time to figure out where his head was and whether he represented a help or a hindrance in my attempt to get close to Bibianna. Jimmy held his hand out. “Dance with me,” he said.
