---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "I Is for Innocent A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_016.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - I Is for Innocent A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["said", "morley", "louise", "like", "could", "dorothy", "know", "thought", "right", "death", "might", "going", "got", "look", "never", "well", "came", "day", "really", "tell", "kind", "soup", "something", "see", "barney"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/IIsforInnocentAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit016html

---


Unknown
Chapter 15I stopped off at my place after I left Tippy and grabbed a hasty lunch, which I ate without much interest. There was precious little in the refrigerator and I was forced to open a can of asparagus soup, which I think I bought originally to put over something else. I’ve been told novice cooks are chronically engaged in this hoary ruse. Cream of celery soup over pork chops, baked at 350 for an hour. Cream of mushroom soup over meat loaf, same time, same temp. Cream of chicken soup over a chicken breast with half a cup of rice thrown in. The variations are endless and the best part is you have company once, you never see them again. Aside from the aforementioned, I can scramble eggs and make a fair tuna salad, but that’s about it. I eat a lot of sandwiches, peanut-butter-and-pickle and cheese-and-pickle being two. I also favor hot sliced hard-boiled egg sandwiches on whole wheat bread with lots of salt and Best Foods mayonnaise. As far as I’m concerned, the only reason for cooking is to keep your hands busy while you think about something else.What was bugging me at this point was this question of Morley’s death. What if David Barney’s paranoia was justified? He’d been right about everything else. What if Morley was getting too close to the truth and had been eliminated as a consequence? I was torn between the notion of murder as too farfetched and the worry that someone was actually getting away with it. I went back and forth, exploring the possibilities. His curiosity might well have been stimulated by his conversation with David Barney. Maybe he’d inadvertently stumbled across something significant. Had he been silenced? I could feel myself shy away from the idea. It was so damn melodramatic. Morley had died of a heart attack. The death certificate had been signed by his family doctor. I didn’t doubt there were drugs that could trigger or simulate the symptoms of cardiac arrest, but it was hard to picture how such a drug might have been administered. Morley wasn’t a fool. Given his health problems, he wasn’t going to take medications not prescribed by his own physician. It almost had to be poison, but I hadn’t heard the possibility mentioned. Who was I to step in and distress his ailing widow? She had problems enough and all I had to offer was conjecture.I finished my soup, washed the bowl, and left it in the dish rack with my solitary spoon. If I kept up this cycle of cereal and soup, I could eat for a week without dirtying another dish. I wandered idly around the apartment, feeling restless and uneasy. I wanted desperately to talk to Lonnie, but I didn’t see a way to do it, short of driving the hour up to Santa Maria. Ida Ruth seemed to feel he’d resent the intrusion, but I thought he should be apprised of what was going on. Currently, his case was in complete disarray, and I didn’t see a way to clean it up before he came home. He was going to love me.This was now Thursday afternoon. Morley’s funeral was on Friday, and if I had questions to raise about the cause of death I was going to have to move quickly. Once he was buried, this whole issue would be buried with him. Since his death was attributed to natural causes, my guess was that nobody’d bothered to question his activities the last couple of days of his life. I still had no idea where he’d gone or whom he’d seen. The only thing I was sure about was that he’d taken those pictures. I was assuming his actions had been prompted by his conversation with David Barney, but I couldn’t be certain. Maybe he’d talked to Dorothy or Louise about the case.I put a call through to the house. Louise answered on the first ring. “Hi, Louise. This is Kinsey. You found the bag I left?”“Yes, and thank you. I’m sorry we weren’t here, but Dorothy wanted to go over to the funeral home to see Morley. We realized you’d stopped by as soon as we got back.”“How’s Dorothy holding up?”“About as well as could be expected. She’s a pretty tough old bird. We both are if it comes to that.”“Uhm, listen, Louise, I know this is an imposition, but is there any way I could talk to the two of you this afternoon?”“About what?”“I’d really prefer to discuss it in person. Is Dorothy up for a visit?”I could hear her hesitation.“It’s important,” I said.“Just a minute. I’ll check.” She put a hand over the mouthpiece and I could hear the murmur of their conversation. She came back on the line. “If you can make it brief,” she said.“I’ll be out there in fifteen minutes.”For the third time in two days, I drove out to Morley’s house in Colgate. The early afternoon sun was just making an appearance. December and January are really our best months. February can be rainy and it’s usually gray. Spring in Santa Teresa is like spring anywhere else in the country. By early summer, we’re swathed in a perpetual marine layer so that days begin in the bright white-gray of fog and end in a curious golden sunlight. So far December had been a blend of the two seasons, spring and summer alternating inexplicably from day to day.Louise answered my knock and let me into the living room, where Dorothy had been ensconced on the couch.“I’m going to make us a pot of tea,” Louise murmured and then excused herself. Moments later, I could hear her rattling dishes as she took them from the cupboard.Dorothy was still dressed in a skirt and sweater from her recent outing. She’d taken off her shoes and a quilt had been tucked around her legs for warmth. One narrow foot, looking as fragile as porcelain, extended from the swaddling. She and Louise might have looked more like sisters before her illness had drained her face of color. Both were small-boned with blue eyes and fine-textured skin. Dorothy was sporting a platinum-blond wig in a blowsy bedroom style. She caught my eye and smiled, reaching up to adjust the Dynel pouf. “I always wanted to be a blonde,” she said ruefully and then held out her hand. “You’re Kinsey Millhone. Morley told me all about you.” We shook hands. Hers felt light and cold, as leathery as a bird’s claw.“Morley talked about me?” I said with surprise.“He always thought you had great promise if you could learn to curb your tongue.”I laughed. “I haven’t quite managed that, but it’s nice to hear. I was sorry he and Ben never patched up their differences.”“They were both much too stubborn,” she said with mock disgust. “Morley never could remember what they fought about. Have a seat, dear. Louise will bring us some tea in just a minute.”I chose a small chair covered in a tapestry. “I don’t want to be a bother. I appreciate this. You must be tired.”“Oh, I’m used to that. If I fade, you’ll just have to forgive me and carry on with Loo. We were just over at the funeral home for the ‘Viewing,’ as they refer to it.”“How does he look?”“Well, I don’t think the dead ever look good. They seem flat somehow. Have you ever noticed that? Like they’ve had half the stuffing taken out,” she said. Her tone was matter-of-fact, as if she were discussing an old mattress instead of the man she’d been married to for forty-odd years. “I hope that doesn’t sound heartless. I loved the man dearly and I can’t tell you what a shock it was to have him go like that. This past year, we talked quite a lot about death, but I always assumed mine was the one under discussion.”Louise returned to the room. “The tea will just be another minute. In the meantime, why don’t you tell us what’s on your mind.” She perched on the arm of Morley’s leather chair.“I need some answers to a few questions and I thought you might help. Did Morley talk to you about this case he was working on? I don’t want to give you background if you already know the setup.”Dorothy adjusted her quilt. “Morley told me about every case. As I understand it, this fellow Barney had already been tried for murder. The lawsuit was an attempt on the part of the victim’s ex-husband to prove him guilty of wrongful death so that he couldn’t inherit the woman’s estate.”“Exactly,” I said. “David Barney got in touch with me twice yesterday. He said he’d talked to Morley on Wednesday of last week. He implied Morley was going to look into a couple of questions for him. Did Morley tell you what he was doing? I’m trying to piece this together and I don’t want to jump to conclusions if I can help it.”“Well, let’s see now. I know the fellow got in touch with him, but he never went into any detail. I had my chemo Wednesday afternoon and I was in bad shape. Usually we spent time together in the evenings, but I was completely exhausted and ended up in bed. I slept right through the evening and most of Thursday.”I glanced at Louise. “What about you? Did he talk to you about it?”She shook her head. “Not anything specific. Just the fact that they’d talked and he had work to do.”“Did he seem to believe what David Barney had told him?”Louise thought about that and shook her head. “I’m not really sure. He must have given him some credit or he wouldn’t have done anything.”Dorothy spoke up. “Well, now that’s not quite true, Loosie. Whatever the man said, he was trying to keep an open mind. Morley said it was foolish to make assumptions before all the facts were in.”I said, “That’s certainly what I was taught.” I reached into my shoulder bag and retrieved the pack of photographs. “It looks like he took these sometime on Friday. Did he tell you what he was up to?”“That one I can answer,” Louise said promptly. “We had an early lunch together. Since he was dieting, he liked to have his meals here at the house. Less temptation, he said. He left here about noon and went out to the office to pick up his mail. He had an early afternoon appointment and then he spent the rest of the day out looking for trucks. He dropped the film off on his way home and said he’d pick the prints up Saturday, which was when he started feeling poorly. He probably forgot all about it.”“How’d he know what to look for?”“You mean what kind of truck it was? He didn’t say anything about that. He thought the same truck might have been involved in some kind of accident, but he didn’t say what it was or how he came to that conclusion. He’d picked up a description of it from the original police report.”I thought about the timing. Everything must have come on the heels of his conversation with David Barney. “What happened on Saturday?”“With his work?” Louise asked.“I mean with anything.” I looked from Louise to Dorothy, inviting either one to answer.Dorothy took my cue. “Nothing unusual. He went into the office and did some things out there. Mail and whatnot from the sound of it.”“Did he have an appointment?”“If he was seeing anyone, he didn’t say who. He came home around noon and just picked at his lunch. He usually took his meals in my room so we could visit while he ate. I asked him then if he was feeling all right. He said he had a headache and thought he was coming down with something. I thought that was more than Louise had bargained for — two invalids for the price of one. I sent him to bed. I couldn’t believe he actually listened, but he did what I said. Turned out he had that terrible flu that’s been going around. The poor thing. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach cramps.”“Could it have been food poisoning instead?”“I don’t see how, dear. All he had for breakfast was cereal with skim milk.”“Morley really ate that? It doesn’t sound like him,” I said.Dorothy laughed. “His doctor put him on a diet at my insistence — fifteen hundred calories a day. Saturday lunch, he had a little soup and a few bites of dry toast. He said he was a little nauseated and didn’t have much appetite. By midafternoon, he was sick as a dog. He spent half the night with his head in the commode. We joked about taking turns if I started feeling worse. Sunday morning he was better, though he didn’t look good at all. His color was terrible, but the vomiting had stopped and he was able to keep a little ginger ale down.”“Tell me about Sunday dinner. Did you fix it yourself?”“Oh dear no, I don’t cook. I haven’t cooked for months. Do you remember, Loosie?”“I made us a cold plate, poached chicken breast with salad,” she said. From the kitchen came the piercing shriek of the kettle. She excused herself and headed off in that direction while Dorothy took up the narrative.“I was feeling better by then so I came out to the table just to keep them both company. He did complain some of chest pain, but I assumed it was indigestion. Louise was concerned, but I remember teasing him. I forget what I said now, but I was sure it wasn’t serious. He pushed his plate back and got up. He had his hand to his chest and he was gasping for breath. He took two steps and went down. He was gone almost at once. We called the paramedics and we tried mouth-to-mouth, but it was pointless.”“Mrs. Shine, I don’t know how to say this, but is there any way you might consider having the body autopsied? I know the subject is painful and you may not feel there’s any necessity, but I’d feel better if we were really sure about the cause of death.”“What’s the nature of your concern?”“I’m wondering if someone, uhm, tampered with his food or medications.”Her gaze settled on my face with a look of almost luminous clarity. “You think he was murdered.”“I’d like to have it ruled out. It may be a long shot, but we’ll never know otherwise. Once he goes in the ground...”“I understand,” she said. “I’d like to talk it over with Louise and perhaps Morley’s brother, who’s arriving tonight.”“Could I call you later this evening? I’m really sorry to have to press. I know it’s distressing, but with services tomorrow, time is very short.”“Don’t apologize,” she said. “Of course you may call. At this point, I don’t suppose an autopsy would do any harm.”“I’d like to have a conversation with the coroner’s office to alert them to the situation, but I don’t want to do anything without your permission.”“I have no objections.”“To what?” Louise asked as she came around the corner with a fully laden tea tray. She placed the tray on the coffee table. Dorothy filled her in, summing up the possibilities as succinctly as she’d summed up the wrongful death suit.“Oh, let her go ahead with it,” Louise said. She filled a cup and passed it over to me. “If you discuss it with Frank, you’ll never hear the end of it.”Dorothy smiled. “I thought the same thing myself, but I didn’t want to say so.” To me she said, “Go ahead and do whatever you think best.”“Thank you.”Detective Burt Walker, of the coroner’s bureau, was a man in his early forties with receding auburn hair and a close-clipped beard and mustache in a blend of red and blond. His face was round, his complexion ruddy, his coloring suggestive of Scandinavian heritage. His glasses were small and round with thin metal frames. He wasn’t heavyset, but he looked like a man who was becoming more substantial as the years went on. The weight looked good on him. He wore a brown tweed jacket, beige chinos, blue shirt, a red tie with white polka dots. While I detailed the circumstances surrounding Morley’s death, he leaned an elbow on his desk and variously nodded and rubbed his forehead. I verbalized my suspicions, but I couldn’t tell if he was taking me seriously or simply being polite.When I finished, he stared at me. “So what are you saying?” I shrugged, embarrassed when it came right down to articulating my hunch. “That he actually died from some kind of poisoning.”“Or maybe it was a poison that precipitated his fatal heart attack,” Burt said.“Right.”“Well. It’s not inconceivable,” he said slowly. “Sounds like he could have been dosed. I don’t guess there’s any chance he might have done it himself, despondent, depressed about something.”“Not really. His wife does have cancer, but they’d been married forty years and he knew she depended on him. He’d never abandon her. They were very devoted from what I gather. If he was poisoned, it’d almost have to be something he ingested without knowing.”“You have a theory about the chemical agent involved?”I shook my head. “I don’t know anything about that stuff. I’ve talked to his wife about his last couple of days and she can’t pinpoint anything in particular. Nothing overt or obvious, at any rate. She said his color was bad, but I really didn’t quiz her about what she meant by that.”“Couldn’t have been anything corrosive or you’d know right off,” he said. He sighed, shaking his head. “I don’t know what to tell you. I’m not going to ask a toxicologist to run any kind of ‘general unknown.’ You got nothing to work with. A request like that is too broad. You look at the number and variety of drugs, pesticides, industrial products... man oh man... even the substances you handle casually at home. From what you’re telling me — I mean, let’s assume you’re right, just for the sake of argument — the problem’s compounded by the fact he was in such poor shape.”“You knew Morley?”He laughed. “Yeah, I knew Morley. Great old guy, but he’s living in the fifties when everybody thought drinking a fifth a day and smoking three packs of cigarettes was just something you did for sport. Guy like Morley whose liver or kidney functions were probably already hampered by disease will be more severely affected by any kind of toxic agent because they got no efficient way to excrete such a substance and they probably can’t tolerate as much as a healthy individual. Few things we can probably eliminate right off the bat,” he said. “Acids, alkalies. I take it she didn’t mention any kind of smell to his breath.”“No, and she’d have noticed. They tried mouth-to-mouth resuscitation at first and then figured out it was pointless.”“Takes out cyanide, paraldehyde, ether, disulfide, and nicotine sulfate. You couldn’t palm those off on a person anyway.”“Arsenic?”“Well, yeah. Symptoms you described would fit that pretty well.Except him feeling better. I don’t like that much. Too bad he never went over to ER. They’d have tagged it.”“I guess with his wife sick, he didn’t want to be a bother,” I said. “Everybody’s had the flu. He probably thought that’s all it was.”“Which it might have been,” Burt said. “On the other hand, if it’s something he ate and you’re talking about the gastrointestinal tract as the portal of entry, then you’re talking about a period of time here when you got both chemical transformation and elimination. Generally speaking, chemicals that enter a living organism are either metabolized, eliminated, or both, which means you’re progressively reducing the amount of detectable poison. Digestive system goes to work. Hell, he’s throwing up the evidence. If the poison kills quickly, there’s almost always quantities present on autopsy. It doesn’t help he’s been embalmed. In a situation like that, when you’ve got embalming fluid injected in the circulatory system with resultant visceral profusion, toxicologist’s problems are blown way bad.”“But would it still be possible to identify?”“Probably. We’d have to analyze samples of clean embalming fluids, too, check those against whatever foreign elements and compounds are found in the viscera. I tell you what would be the biggest help if you want to get serious about this: Bring me any household products you can find on the premises. Check the garbage for suspect foods. Pill bottles, rat poison, roach powder, cleaning and disinfecting agents, garden insecticides, that kind of thing. I can have a conversation with the funeral director and see if he has anything to contribute. Those guys are pretty sharp once they know what you’re after.”“So you’ll do it?”“Well, if she signs the papers, we’ll give it a shot.”I could feel excitement bubble up, mixed with equal parts fear. If I was wrong, I was going to feel like a fool.“What’s the grin for?” he asked.“I didn’t think you’d take me seriously.”“I’m paid to take people seriously when it comes right down to it. Lot of times, presumption of death by poisoning only comes about because of suspicion on the part of decedent’s friends and relatives. We’ll bring Morley out here and take a look.”“What about the funeral?”“They can go ahead with the services. We’ll have him brought out here after that and get right on it.” He paused, giving me a speculative look. “Got a suspect in mind if it turns out you’re right?”“I literally don’t have a clue,” I said. “I’m still trying to figure out who killed Isabelle Barney.”“I wouldn’t try too hard if I were you.”“How come?”“That kind of curiosity might have been what killed Morley.”
