---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "I Is for Innocent A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_019.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - I Is for Innocent A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["henry", "see", "get", "like", "could", "said", "card", "william", "two", "good", "tippy", "car", "back", "look", "probably", "think", "know", "go", "still", "talk", "one", "first", "well", "going", "would"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/IIsforInnocentAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit019html

---


Unknown
Chapter 18I retraced my steps, moving toward the entrance. I could see Henry heading off across the parking lot toward his car. The first cluster of mourners had dispersed to some extent and those who remained in the chapel were just emerging. William appeared from the cool depths of the funeral home, looking somehow offended and confused. He was holding his fedora, which he placed squarely on his head with a slight adjustment to the brim. “I don’t understand what denomination that was.”“I think the service is meant to cover all bets,” I said.He looked back over his shoulder at the facade with disapproval. “The building looks like a restaurant.”“Well, you know, eating out is close to a religion these days,” I said dryly. “People used to tithe to the church. Now the ten percent goes to the waiter instead.”“It wasn’t very satisfactory as funerals go. In Michigan, we conduct these services properly. I understand there’s not even going to be a graveside ceremony. Very disrespectful, if you ask me.”“It’s just as well,” I said. “From what I know of Morley, he didn’t have a highly developed spiritual side and he probably wouldn’t have wanted any kind of fuss made about his death. Anyway, his wife is ill and might not have been up for more than this.” I didn’t mention that the body would probably be whisked over to the coroner’s office within the hour.“Where did Henry go?” William asked.“He’s bringing the car around, I think.”“Will you be coming back to the house with us? We’re having a light lunch on the patio and we’d be happy to have you join us. We invited Rose, hoping to reciprocate her many courtesies.”“I wish I could, but I have something to take care of. I’ll stop by a little later and see what you’re up to.”Henry pulled up beside us in his five-window coupe. It’s a 1932 Chevrolet that he’s had since it was new. It’s been meticulously maintained, boasting the original paint, headliner, and upholstery. If William were driving it, I suspect the car would seem prissy. With Henry at the wheel, there was something rakish and sexy about the vehicle. You have to keep an eye on Henry as he’s still very appealing to ‘babes’ of all ages, including me. I could see people turning to admire the car, checking him out afterward to see if he was someone famous. Because Santa Teresa is less than two hours away from Hollywood, a number of movie stars live in town. We all know this, but it’s still disconcerting when some guy at the car wash who looks just like John Travolta turns out to be John Travolta. I saw Steve Martin driving through Montebello once and nearly rammed into a tree trying to get a good look at him. He’s Technicolor handsome, in case you’re wondering.William got into Henry’s car and the two rumbled off. There was still not a hint about the trap Rosie meant to spring. Whatever her intention, it was still early in the game. William did seem less self-absorbed today. We’d actually made it through a three-minute conversation without reference to his health.I drove back into town, taking the freeway south on 101. I got off at the Missile off-ramp and headed east until I reached State Street, where I hung a right. The Axminster Gallery, where Rhe Parsons’s show would be opening that night, was located in a complex that included the Axminster Theater and numerous small businesses. The gallery itself was located along a walkway that ran behind the shops. I parked on a side street and cut through a public lot. The entrance was marked by a hand-forged iron sign. A panel truck had been backed in close to the door and I could see two guys unloading blocks wrapped in heavily quilted moving pads. The door was standing open and I followed the workmen in. The entry was narrow, probably scaled down for effect, because I quickly passed into a large room with a thirty-foot ceiling. The walls were a stark white and light cascaded down through wide skylights, currently cranked open to admit fresh air. A complicated arrangement of canvas, cording, and pulleys was affixed at ceiling height so that the fabric shades could be drawn across the opening if the light needed to be cut. The floors were gray concrete carpeted with Oriental rugs, the walls hung with batiks and framed watercolor abstracts.Rhe Parsons was consulting with a woman in a smock, the two of them apparently discussing the placement of two final pieces the workmen were bringing in. I circled the room while the discussion continued. Tippy was perched on a stool near the back wall, commenting on the overall effect from her vantage point. Rhe’s show consisted of sixteen pieces arranged on pedestals of varying heights. She was working in resins, casting large polished pieces — maybe eighteen inches on a side — which at first seemed identical. I inspected five in range of me. I could see that the translucent material was formed into subtly tinted layers, with sometimes an object buried at the heart — a perfectly preserved insect, a safety pin, a locket on a chain, a ring of brass keys. With the light shining through, the effect was of peering through blocks of ice, except that the resin looked solid and indestructible. It wasn’t hard to imagine these totems being dug up at some point in the future, along with bleach bottles, pull tabs, and disposable diapers.Rhe must have seen me, but she gave no sign of recognition. She was wearing jeans and a heavy mohair sweater in shades of pale blue and mauve. Her dark hair was banded at the nape of her neck, a long silky tassel reaching almost to her waist. Tippy wore a jumpsuit in a lightweight denim. Unseen by her mother, she greeted me with a wiggle of her fingers, which I took to mean “Hi.” It was heartening to realize that the person whose life I’d allegedly ruined was alive and well and still speaking to me.Rhe murmured something to her companion, who turned to stare at me. The woman picked up a clipboard and clopped off across the room, stack heels resounding on the concrete floor.“Hello, Rhe.”“What the hell do you want?”“I thought we should talk. I didn’t mean to cause you any trouble.”“Wonderful. That’s great. I’ll tell my attorney you said so.”Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Tippy hop down from the stool and cross the room toward us. Rhe made the kind of gesture an owner uses with a dog. She snapped her fingers and held her hand flat, meaning “Stay” or “Lie down.”Tippy wasn’t that well trained. She said “Mom...” in a tone that embraced both outrage and insult.“This doesn’t concern you.”“It does too!”“Wait for me in the car, baby. I’ll be there in a minute.”“Can’t I even listen to the conversation?”“Just do as I tell you!”“Well, God!” Tippy said. She rolled her eyes and sighed hard, but she did as her mother asked.As soon as she’d left, Rhe turned on me with a chill fury. “Do you have any idea the damage you’ve done?”“Hey, I came here to discuss the situation, not to take abuse. What did I do?”“Tippy just got herself squared away. She’s finally on track and now you come along with this trumped-up allegation.”“I wouldn’t call it trumped up....”“Let’s not get into semantics. The point is, even if it’s true, which I greatly doubt, you didn’t have to turn it into a big deal —”“What big deal?”“Besides which, if you’re convinced she’s guilty of some kind of criminal behavior, she’s entitled to an attorney. You had no right to confront her without my being present.”“She’s twenty-two, Rhe. In the eyes of the law, she’s an adult. I don’t want to see her charged with anything. There might have been an explanation, and if so, I wanted to hear it. All I did was talk to her, trying to get information, and I did that without going to the cops first, which I could easily have done. If I’m aware a crime’s been committed, I can’t look the other way. The minute I cover for her, I become an accessory.”“You intimidated her. You were threatening and manipulative. By the time I got home, she was hysterical. I really don’t know what your story is, but you had better take a good hard look at yourself. You are not judge and jury here —”I raised my hands. “Wait a minute. Just wait. This isn’t about me. This is about Tippy, who seems to be dealing with reality a lot better than you are. I understand you feel protective — I would, too — but let’s not lose sight of the facts.”“What facts? There aren’t any facts!”“Let’s skip it. Never mind. Discussion isn’t possible. I can see that now. I’ll have Lonnie talk to your attorney as soon as he gets back.”“Good. You do that. And you better be prepared for the worst.”Trying to get the last word in was almost irresistible, but I closed my mouth and removed myself from the room before I said something I might regret later. As I left the gallery, Tippy approached and fell into step with me. “I wouldn’t let your mother see us together if I were you.”“What’d she say?”“Just about what you’d expect.”“Don’t worry, okay? I know she was really mad, but she’ll get over it. She’s been under a lot of pressure lately, but she’ll come around.”“Let’s hope so for your sake,” I said. “Listen, Tip, I’m really sorry this had to happen. I feel like a dog, but I didn’t see a way around it.”“It’s not your fault. I’m the one who fucked up. I’m the one who should feel bad about it, not you.”“How are you doing?”“Pretty good,” she said. “I talked to one of my AA counselors last night and she was really great. As soon as we finish here I’ll go talk to her, and then later this afternoon I’ll talk to the police.”“Your mother’s right. It’s probably a good idea to see an attorney before you do. You need some advice about presenting your side of it.”“I don’t care about that. I just want to get it over with.”“It still might be smart. They’ll want your attorney there anyway before you make a statement. You want me to go with you?”She shook her head. “I can handle it, but thanks.”“Good luck.”“You, too.” She glanced back toward the gallery reluctantly. “I better split. I don’t guess we’ll see you at the opening tonight.”“Probably not, but I do like her work,” I said. “Call if you need me.”She smiled and waved, walking backward, then turned and went back to the gallery.I got in my car and sat there for a minute, feeling heavyhearted. Tippy was a good person. I wished there were some way to spare her what she would have to go through. She’d be okay in the end, I was confident of that, but I didn’t relish having been the impetus for her pain. I could argue she’d actually brought it on herself, but the truth was, she’d found a way to live with the situation for six years now. I had to guess she’d experienced remorse and regret in privacy. Maybe there simply wasn’t any way to avoid public penance. In the meantime, I was left with feelings of my own. I really couldn’t deal with any more angry people. I’d had it with accusations, threats, and bullying. My job was to figure out what was going on and I intended to do that.I reached for the ignition key and fired up the VW, then did an illegal U-turn. There was a drugstore a block up and I pulled into the tiny lot, ducking in just long enough to buy three packages of three-by-five index cards — one white, one green, and one a pale orange. After that, I went home. I still had a batch of files from Morley’s Colgate office in my car. I found a parking spot across the street from the apartment. I unloaded the backseat and proceeded through the gate, weighted down like a pack mule. I eased around to the backyard and fumbled with my keys.In the glass-enclosed breezeway that links Henry’s place with mine, I caught sight of the luncheon in progress. The December sun was weak, but with so many windows the space functioned like a greenhouse. William and Rosie had their heads bent together in earnest conversation. The subject was probably pericarditis, colitis, or the perils of lactose intolerance. Henry’s face was dark and I could have sworn he was sulking, a behavior utterly unlike the Henry I knew. I anchored the stack of files against the doorframe with my hip while I unlocked my apartment and let myself in. I dumped everything on the counter. I turned around to find Henry coming in behind me with a plate piled with food — lemon chicken, ratatouille, green salad, and homemade rolls.“Hi, how are you? Is that for me? It looks great. How’s it going?” I asked.He put the plate down on the counter. “You won’t believe it,” he said.“What’s the matter? Hasn’t Rosie found a way to whip William into shape?”Henry squinted his eyes and tapped his temple with his index finger. “It’s funny you should mention that. The penny finally dropped. Do you know what she’s doing? She’s flirting with him!”“Rosie always flirts.”“But William’s flirting back.” He opened a kitchen drawer and pulled out a knife and fork, which he handed me with a paper napkin.“Well, there’s no harm in that,” I said, and then saw his look. “Is there?”“You eat while I talk. Suppose the two of them get serious? What do you think’s going to happen?”“Oh, come on. They’ve known each other one day.” I tried a bite of roll first, tender and buttery.“He’s going to be here two weeks. I hate to think what the next thirteen days are going to bring at this rate,” he said.“You’re jealous.”“I’m not jealous. I’m terrified. He was fine this morning. Obsessed with his bowels. He took his blood pressure twice. He had several mysterious symptoms that occupied him for an hour. Then we went off to the funeral and he still seemed okay. We get home and he had to go and rest for a while. Same old William. No sweat, I can handle it. I put lunch together and then Rosie shows up wearing rouge on her cheeks. Next thing I know, the two of them are in there with their heads together, laughing and nudging like a couple of kids!”“I think it’s sweet. I like Rosie.” I had moved on to the chicken, tucking into lunch in earnest. I hadn’t realized I was hungry until I started chowing down.“I like her, too. Rosie’s fine. She’s great. But as a sister-in-law?”“It won’t come to that.”“Oh, it won’t? You ought to go in and listen to ’em talk. It would make your stomach turn.”“Come on, Henry. You’re overreacting. William’s eighty-five years old. She’s probably sixty-five, if she’d ever admit to it.”“My point exactly. She’s too young for him.”I started laughing. “I can’t believe you’re serious.”“I can’t believe you’re not! What if they get ‘involved’ in some flaming affair? Can you imagine the two of them in my back bedroom?”“Is that your objection, that William might have a sex life? Henry, you astonish me. That’s not like you.”“I think it’s tacky behavior,” he said.“He hasn’t done anything yet! Besides, I thought you wanted him to quit harping on his health. What better way? Now he can harp on something else.”Henry stared at me, his expression suddenly tinged with uncertainty. “You don’t think it’s vulgar? Romance at his age?”“I think it’s great. You had a romance of your own not that long ago.”“And look how that turned out.”“You survived it.”“But will he? I keep picturing Rosie flying back to Michigan for Christmas. I hate to sound snobbish, but the woman has no class. She picks her teeth with a bobby pin!”“Oh, quit worrying.”His mouth formed a grudging line as he reconsidered his position. “I don’t suppose it would do any good to protest. They’d just act as if they didn’t know what I was talking about.”I kept my mouth shut, concentrating on the food instead. “This is great,” I said.“There’s some for later if you want it,” he remarked. He pointed to the cards. “You have work to do?”I nodded. “As soon as I finish this.”He blew out a breath. “Well, enough of this nonsense. I better let you get to it.”“Keep me posted on developments.”“Absolutely,” he said.We made the usual departing mouth noises and then he disappeared. I closed the door behind him and made a beeline for the loft, where I kicked off my flats and peeled out of the all-purpose dress and panty hose. I pulled on my jeans, turtleneck, socks, and Nikes. Heaven.I went downstairs, popped open a Diet Pepsi, and got down to business. I spread all the material on the counter: Morley’s files, his calendar, his appointment book, and his rough-draft reports. I made a list of all the people he’d talked to, the dates, and the details of what was said, according to his notes. I opened the first pack of index cards and started making notes of my own, laying out the story as I understood it. I used to use this technique for every case I worked, pinning the cards on my bulletin board so I could see how the story looked. I learned the practice from Ben Byrd, who’d taught me the business when I was first starting out. Now that I thought about it, Ben had probably learned the method from Morley, who’d been in partnership with him until their falling-out. I smiled to myself. They’d called the agency Byrd-Shine; two old-fashioned gumshoes with whiskey bottles in their desk drawers and endless hands of gin rummy. Their specialty had been “matrimonial inquiries,” i.e., extramarital sex. In those days, adultery was considered a shocking breach of morality, good breeding, common decency, and taste. Now you couldn’t qualify for a talk show appearance on grounds that tame.The index cards permitted a variety of approaches: timetables, relationships, the known and the unknown, motives and speculations. Sometimes I shuffled the pack and laid the cards out like solitaire. For some reason, I hadn’t employed the routine of late. It felt good to get back to it. It was restful, reassuring, a welcomed time-out in which to get the facts down.I left my perch and went over to the storage closet, where I hauled out my bulletin board and propped it up on the counter. At this stage, I make no attempt to organize the cards. I censor nothing. There’s no game plan. I simply try to record all the information, writing down everything I can think of in the moment. All the cards for Isabelle’s murder were green. Tippy’s accident was on the orange cards, the players on the white. I found the box of pushpins and began to tack the cards up on the board. By the time I finished the process, it was 4:45. I sat on a kitchen stool, elbows propped on the counter, my chin in my hands. I studied the effect, which really didn’t look like much... a jumble of colors, forming no particular pattern.What was I looking for? The link. The contradiction. Anything out of place. The known seen in a new light, the unknown rising to the surface. At intervals, I took all the cards down and put them up again, ordered or random, arranging them according to various schemes. I thought idly about Isabelle’s murder, letting my mind wander. How delicious it must have been for the killer to watch this whole drama unfold. It was even possible that David Barney’s harassment had suggested the possibility. Shoot Isabelle and who’s the first person they’d suspect? The killer had to be someone who knew David Barney’s habits, someone close enough to the scene to keep watch. Of course, half of the people who knew Isabelle were in that position, I thought. The Weidmanns lived within a mile of the house, as did her sister, Simone, whose cottage was on the property. Laura Barney was an interesting possibility. She certainly knew David’s penchant for late-night runs. On the face of it, she had little or nothing to gain. I’d tended to assume that the motive was money, but among the killing set there were probably many other satisfactions besides greed to be derived from homicide. What could be more perfect than killing the woman who’d wrecked her marriage and having the blame for it fall on her ex-husband?There was something here. I was almost sure of it. Maybe it was the angle of approach, some elusive piece of information, some new interpretation of the facts as I knew them.When the telephone rang, I jumped, my heart banging abruptly into cardiac arrest range.It was Ida Ruth. “Kinsey. I hope I’m not interrupting anything, but you just got a call from the coroner’s office, a Mr. Walker. I guess he left a message on your office machine and then tried this one. He wants you to call him as soon as you can.”I tucked the phone against my shoulder while I picked up a pen and reached for a scratch pad. “What’s Burt’s number, did he give it to you?”She gave me the number. As soon as she hung up, I dialed his office.
