---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "K Is for Killer A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_007.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - K Is for Killer A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["like", "could", "see", "room", "door", "set", "back", "probably", "rosie", "said", "look", "front", "one", "still", "bar", "left", "cheney", "made", "picked", "night", "going", "want", "lieutenant", "dolan", "two"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/KIsforKillerAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit007html

---


Unknown
Chapter 6I nosed the VW down the narrow dirt road that cut into the property close to the rear lot line. The lane had once been black-topped, but now the surface was cracked and graying, overgrown with crab-grass. My headlights swept along the two rows of live oaks that defined the rutted pathway. The branches, interlocking overhead, formed a tunnel of darkness through which I passed. Shrubbery that once might have been neatly trimmed and shaped now spilled in a tumble that made progress slow. Granted, my car may have seen better days, but I was reluctant to let branches snap against the pale blue paint. The potholes were already acting on my shock absorbers like a factory test.I reached a clearing where a crude cabin loomed in the shadows. I did a three-point turn, positioning the car so I could avoid backing out. I doused the lights. The illusion of privacy was immediate and profound. I could hear crickets in the underbrush. Otherwise, there was silence. It was hard to believe there were other houses nearby, flanked by city streets. The dim illumination from streetlights didn’t penetrate this far, and the sound of traffic was reduced to the mild hush of a distant tide. The area felt like a wilderness, yet my office downtown couldn’t have been more than ten minutes away.Peering toward the main house, I could see nothing but the thick growth of saplings, ancient live oaks, and a few shaggy evergreens. Even with the limbs bare on the occasional deciduous tree, the distant lights were obscured. I popped open the glove compartment and took out a flashlight. I tested the beam and found that the batteries were strong. I tucked my handbag in the backseat and locked the car as I got out. About fifty feet away, between me and the main house, I could see the skeletal tepee constructions for the pole beans in the now abandoned garden. The air smelled densely of damp moss and eucalyptus.I moved up the steps to the wooden porch that ran along the front of the cabin. The front door had been removed from its hinges and now leaned against the wall to one side of the opening. I flipped the light switch, relieved to note the electrical power was still connected. There was only one fixture overhead, with a forty-watt bulb that bathed the rooms in drab light. There was little, if any, insulation, and the place was dead cold. While all the window-panes were intact, a fine soot had settled in every crevice and crack. Dead insects lined the sills. In one corner of the window frame, a spider had wrapped a fly in a white silken sleeping bag. The air smelled of mold, corroded metal, and spoiled water sitting fallow in the plumbing joints. A section of the wooden floor in the main room had been sawed away by the crime scene unit, the gaping hole covered over with a sheet of warped plywood. I picked my way carefully around that. Just above my head, something thumped and scampered through the attic. I imagined squirrels squeezing into roof vents, building nests for their babies. The beam of my flashlight picked up countless artifacts of the ten months of neglect: rodent droppings, dead leaves, small pyramids of debris created by the termites.The interior living space was arranged in an L, with a narrow bathroom built into its innermost angle. The plumbing was shared between the bathroom and the kitchenette, with a dining area that wrapped around the corner to the “living” room. I could see the metal plate in the floor to which the wood-burning stove had been affixed. The walls, painted white, were dotted with daddy longlegs, and I found myself keeping an uneasy eye on them as I toured the premises. To one side of the front door was the Belltone box for the doorbell, about the size of a cigarette pack. Someone had popped the housing away from the wall, and I could see that the interior mechanism was missing. An electrical wire, sheathed in green plastic, had been cut and now drooped sideways like a wilted flower stem with the blossom gone.Lorna’s sleeping area had probably been tucked into the short arm of the L. The kitchen cabinets were empty, linoleum-lined shelves still gritty with cornmeal and old cereal dust. Karo syrup or molasses had oozed onto the surface, and I could see circles where the bottoms of the canned goods had formed rings. I checked the bathroom, which was devoid of exterior windows. The toilet was old, the tank tall and narrow. The bowl itself protruded in front, like a porcelain Adam’s apple. The brown wood seat was cracked and looked as if it would pinch you in places you cherished. The sink was the size of a dishpan, supported on two metal legs. I tried the cold-water faucet, jumping back with a shriek when a shot of brown water spurted out. The water pipes began to make a low-pitched humming sound, sirens in the underground announcing the crime of trespass. The bathtub rested on ball feet. Dead leaves had collected in a swirling pattern near the drain, while black swans glided across an opaque green plastic shower curtain that hung from an elliptical metal frame.In the main room, despite the lack of furniture, I could surmise how the space had been used. Close to the front door, dents in the pine flooring suggested the placement of a couch and two chairs. I pictured a small wooden dinette set at the other end of the living room where it turned the corner into the kitchen. To one side of the sink, there was a small cabinet with a phone jack attached just above the baseboard. Lorna probably had a portable phone or a long extension cord, which would have allowed her to keep the phone in the kitchen by day and beside her bed at night. I turned and scanned the premises. Around me, shadows deepened and the daddy longlegs began to tiptoe down the walls, restless at my intrusion. I eased out of the cabin, keeping a close eye on them.I picked at my dinner, sitting alone in my favorite booth at Rosie’s restaurant half a block from my apartment. As usual, Rosie had bullied me into ordering according to her dictates. It’s a phenomenon I don’t seriously complain about. Beyond McDonald’s Quarter Pounders with Cheese, I don’t have strong food preferences, and I’m just as happy to have someone else steer me through the menu. Tonight she recommended the caraway seed soup with dumplings, followed by a braised pork dish, yet another Hungarian recipe involving meatstuffs overwhelmed by sour cream and paprika. Rosie’s is not so much a restaurant as it is a funky neighborhood bar where exotic dishes are whipped up according to her whims. The place always feels as though it’s on the verge of being raided by the food police, so narrowly does it skirt most public health regulations. The scent in the air is a blend of Hungarian spices, beer, and cigarette smoke. The tables in the center of the room are those chrome-and-Formica dinette sets left over from the 1940s. Booths hug the walls: stiff, high-backed pews sawed out of construction-grade plywood, stained dark brown to disguise all the knotholes and splinters.It was not quite seven, and none of the habitual sports enthusiasts were in evidence. Most nights, especially in the summer months, the place is filled with noisy teams of bowlers and softball players in company uniforms. In winter, they’re forced to improvise. Just this week a group of revelers had invented a game called Toss the Jockstrap, and a hapless example of this support garment was now snagged on the spike of a dusty marlin above the bar. Rosie, who is otherwise quite bossy and humorless, seemed to find this amusing and left it where it was. Apparently her impending nuptials had lowered her IQ several critical points. She was currently perched up on a bar stool, scanning the local papers while she smoked a cigarette. A small color television set was blaring at one end of the bar, but neither of us was paying much attention to the broadcast. Rosie’s beloved William, Henry’s older brother, had flown to Michigan with him. Rosie and William were getting married in a month, though the date seemed to drift.The telephone rang from its place on the near end of the bar. Rosie glanced over at it with annoyance, and at first I thought she wouldn’t answer it at all. She took her time about it, refolding the paper before she set it aside. She finally answered on the sixth ring, and after she’d exchanged a few brief remarks with the caller, her gaze jumped to mine. She held the receiver in my direction and then clunked it down on the bar top, probably devastating someone’s eardrum.I pushed my dinner plate aside and eased out of the booth, careful that I didn’t snag a splinter in the back of my thigh. One day I’m going to rent a belt sander and give all the wooden seats a thorough scouring. I’m tired of worrying about the possibility of impaling myself on spears of cheap plywood. Rosie had moved to the far end of the bar, where she turned down the volume on the TV set. I crossed to the bar and picked up the receiver. “Hello?”“Hey, Kinsey. Cheney Phillips. How are you?”“How’d you know where I was?”“I talked to Jonah Robb, and he told me you used to hang out at Rosie’s. I tried your home number and your machine picked up, so I figured you might be having dinner.”“Good detective work,” I said. I didn’t even want to ask what had made him think to discuss me with Jonah Robb, who was working the Missing Persons detail at the Santa Teresa Police Department when I’d met him three years before. I’d had a brief affair with him during one of his wife’s periodic episodes of spousal abandonment. Jonah and his wife, Camilla, had been together since seventh grade. She left him at intervals, but he always took her back again. It was love junior high school style, which became very tedious for those on the periphery. I hadn’t known what the game was, and I didn’t understand the role I’d been tagged to play. Once I got the message, I’d opted out of the situation, but it left me feeling bad. When you’re single, you sometimes make those mistakes. Still, it’s disconcerting to think your name is being bandied about. I didn’t like the idea that I was the subject of conversation in the local police locker room.“What are you up to?” I said to Cheney.“Nothing much. I’ll be going down to lower State Street later tonight, looking for a guy with some information I want. I thought you might like to ride along. An old girlfriend of Lorna’s tends to hustle her butt in the same neighborhood. If we spot her, I can introduce you... if you’re interested, of course.”My heart sank as visions of an early bedtime evaporated. “It sounds great. I appreciate the offer. How do you want to work it? Shall I meet you down there?”“You can if you like, but it’s probably better if I swing by and pick you up on the way. I’ll be cruising a big area, and it’s hard to know where I’ll be.”“You know where I live?”“Sure,” he said, and rattled off my address. “I’ll be there about eleven.”“That late?” I squeaked.“The action doesn’t even get rolling ‘til after midnight,” he said. “Is that a problem?”“No, it’s fine.”“See you then,” he said, and hung up.I glanced at my watch and noted with despair that I had about four hours to kill. All I really wanted was to hit the sack, but not if I was going to have to get up again. When I’m down, I like to stay down. Naps leave me feeling hungover without the few carefree moments of an intervening binge. If I was going to drive around with Cheney Phillips until all hours, I thought I’d be better off staying on my feet. I decided I might as well conjure up some work in the interim. I drank two cups of coffee and then paid Rosie for my dinner, taking my jacket and handbag as I headed out into the night.The sun had set at 5:45, and the moon probably wouldn’t be rising until 2:00 A.M. At this hour, everybody in the neighborhood was still wide awake. In almost every house I passed, front windows glowed as if the rooms within were aflame. Night moths like soft birds batted ineffectually against the porch bulbs. February had silenced all the summer insects, but I could still hear a few hearty crickets in the dry grass and an occasional nightbird. Otherwise, the quiet was pervasive. It seemed warmer than last night, and I knew, from the evening paper, that the cloud cover was increasing. The winds were northerly, shaking through the thatch of dried palm fronds above me. I walked the half block to my apartment and let myself in briefly to check for messages.There was nothing on my machine. I went out again before I yielded to the temptation to call Cheney and cancel tonight’s big adventure. The squeak in the gate seemed like a melancholy sound, cold metal protesting my departure. I got in my car and turned the key in the ignition, cranking the lever for the heater as soon as the engine roared to life. There was no way the system could deliver hot air so soon, but I needed the illusion of coziness and warmth.I headed out the 101 for half a mile and took the Puerta Street off-ramp. St. Terry’s Hospital was only two blocks down. I found a parking space on a side street, locked the car, and walked the remaining half block to the front entrance. Technically, visiting hours didn’t start until eight, but I was hoping the nursing director on the cardiac care unit would bend the rules a bit.The glass doors slid open as I approached. I passed the hospital cafe to the left of the lobby, with its couches arranged in numerous conversational groupings. Several ambulatory patients, wearing robes and slippers, had elected to come down and sit with family members and friends. The area was rather like a large, comfortably furnished living room, complete with piped-in music and paintings by local artists. The scent in the lobby was not at all unpleasant but nonetheless reminded me of hard times. My aunt Gin had died here on a February night over ten years ago. I shut the door on the thought and all the memories that came with it.The gift shop was open, and I did a quick detour. I wanted to buy something for Lieutenant Dolan, though I couldn’t think quite what. Neither the teddy bears nor the peignoirs seemed appropriate. Finally I picked up an oversize candy bar and the latest issue of People. Entering a hospital room is always easier with an item in hand — anything to smooth your intrusion on the intimacies of illness. Ordinarily I wouldn’t dream of conducting business with a man in his pajamas.I paused at the information desk long enough to get his room number and directions to CCU, then hiked down countless corridors toward the bank of elevators in the west wing. I punched the button for three and emerged into a light, airy foyer with a glossy, snow-white floor. I turned left into a short hallway. The CCU waiting room was just to the right. I peered through the glass window set into the door. The room was empty and spare: a round table, three chairs, two love seats, a television set, pay phone, and several magazines. I moved over to the door leading into CCU. There was a phone on the wall and beside it a sign advising me to call in for permission to enter. A nurse or a ward clerk picked up the call, and I told her I wanted to see Lieutenant Dolan.“Wait a minute and I’ll check.”There was a pause, and then she told me to come on in. The curious thing about illness is that a lot of it looks just like you’d expect. We’ve seen it all on television: the activity at the nurses’ station, the charts and the machinery designed to monitor the ailing. On the cardiac care unit, the floor nurses wore ordinary street clothes, which made the atmosphere seem more relaxed and less clinical. There were five or six of them, all young and quite friendly. Medical personnel could oversee vital signs from a central vantage point. I stood at the counter and watched eight different hearts beat, a row of green spiky hiccups on screens lined up on the desk.The ward itself was done in southwestern colors: dusty pinks, mild sky blues, cool pale greens. The doors to each room were made of sliding glass, easily visible from the nurses’ station, with draw drapes that could be pulled shut if privacy was required. The feel of the unit was as clean and quiet as a desert: no flowers, no artificial plants, all the laminate surfaces plain and spare. The paintings on the walls were of desert vistas, mountains rising in the distance.I asked for Lieutenant Dolan, and the nurse directed me down the corridor. “Second door on the left,” he said.“Thanks.”I paused in the doorway of Lieutenant Dolan’s room, which was sleek and contemporary. The bed he rested on was as narrow as a monk’s. I was used to seeing him on the job, in a rumpled gray suit, grumpy, harassed, completely businesslike. Here he seemed smaller. He was wearing an unstructured, pastel cotton gown with short sleeves and a tie back. He sported a day’s growth of beard, which showed prickly gray across his cheeks. I could see the tired, ropy flesh of his neck, and his once muscular arms were looking stringy and thin. A floor-to-ceiling column near the head of his bed housed the paraphernalia necessary to monitor his status. Cables pasted to his chest looped up to a plug in the column, where a screen played out his vital signs like a ticker tape. He was reading the paper, half-glasses low on his nose. He was attached to an IV. When he caught sight of me, he set the paper aside and took his glasses off. He gave the edge of the sheet a tug, pulling it across his bare feet.He motioned me in. “Well, look who it is. What brings you down here?” He ran a hand through his hair, which was sparse at best and now looked as if it had been slicked back with sweat. He pushed himself up against the angled bed. His plastic hospital bracelet made his wrist seem vulnerable, but he didn’t seem ill. It was as if I’d caught him on a Sunday morning, lounging around in his pajamas before church.“Cheney told me you were laid up, so I thought I’d pop by. I hope I didn’t interrupt your paper.”“I’ve read it three times. I’m so desperate I’m down to the personals. Somebody named Erroll wants Louise to call him, in case you know either one.”I smiled, wishing he looked stronger, knowing I’d look even worse if I were in his place. I held out the magazine. “For you,” I said. “I figure nothing in your condition precludes an overdose of gossip. If you’re really bored, you can always do the crossword puzzle in the back. How’re you feeling? You look good.”“I’m not bad. I’ve been better. The doctor’s talking about moving me off the unit tomorrow, which seems like a good sign.” He scratched at the stubble on his chin. “I’m taking advantage by refusing to shave. What do you think?”“Very devil-may-care,” I said. “You can go straight from here to a life on the bum.”“Pull a chair over. Have a seat. Just move that.”The chair in the near corner had the rest of the paper and several magazines piled up on the seat. I set the whole batch aside and dragged the chair over toward the bed, aware that both Dolan and I were using chitchat and busywork to cover a basic uneasiness. “What are they telling you about going back to work?”“They won’t say at this point, but I imagine it’ll be a while yet. Two, three months. I scared ’em pretty bad, from what everybody says. Hell, Tom Flowers ended up doing mouth-to-mouth, which he’ll never live down. Must have been a sight for sore eyes.”“You’re still with us, at any rate.”“That I am. Anyway, how are you? Cheney told me about Janice Kepler. How’s it going so far?”I shrugged. “All right, I guess. I’ve been on it less than a day. I’m supposed to meet Cheney later. He’s going to cruise lower State, looking for a snitch, and offered to point out a chum of Lorna’s while he’s about it.”“Probably Danielle,” Dolan said. “We talked to her at the time, but she wasn’t much help. You know these little gals. The life they live is so damn dangerous. Night after night, connecting up with strangers. Get in a car and you have to be aware it might be the last ride you ever take. And they see us as the enemy. I don’t know why they do it. They’re not stupid.”“They’re desperate.”“I guess that’s what it is. This town is nothing compared to L. A., but it’s still the pits. You take someone like Lorna, and it makes no sense whatever.”“You have a theory about who killed her?”“I wish I did. She kept her distance. She didn’t buddy up to people. Her lifestyle was too unconventional for most.”“Oh, I’ll say. Has anybody told you about the video?”“Cheney mentioned it. I gather you’ve seen it. I probably ought to take a look myself, see if I recognize any of the players.”“You better wait ‘til you’re home. It’ll get your heart rate right up there. Janice Kepler gave me a copy. She’s feeling very paranoid and made me swear I’d guard the damn thing with my very life. I haven’t checked the dirty-book stores, but it wouldn’t surprise me to see half a dozen copies in stock. From the packaging, it looks like it was manufactured up in the Bay Area someplace.”“You going up there?”“I’d like to. Seems like it’s worth a try if I can talk Janice into it.”“Cheney says you want to take a look at the crime scene photographs.”“If you don’t object. I saw the cabin this afternoon, but it’s been empty for months. I’d like to see what it looked like when the body was found.”Lieutenant Dolan’s brow furrowed with distaste. “You’re welcome to take a look, but you better brace yourself. That’s the worst decomp case I ever saw. We had to do toxicology from bone marrow and whatever little bit of liver tissue we could salvage.”“There’s no doubt it was her?”“Absolutely none,” he said. He lifted his eyes to the monitor, and I followed his gaze. His heartbeat had picked up, and the green line was looking like a row of ragged grass. “Amazes me how the memory of something like that can cause a physiological reaction after all these months.”“Did you ever see her in real life?”“No, and it’s probably just as well. I felt bad enough as it was. ‘Dust to dust’ doesn’t quite cover it. Anyway, I’ll call Records and get a set for you. When do you want to go over there?”“Right now, if possible. Cheney doesn’t pick me up for another three hours yet. I was up late last night, and I’m dead on my feet. My only hope is to keep moving.”“Photographs will wake you up.”Most of the departments at the police station close down at six. The crime lab was closed and the detectives gone for the day. In the bowels of the building, the 911 dispatchers would still be sitting at their consoles, fielding emergency calls. The main counter, where parking tickets are paid, was as blank as the ribs on a rolltop desk, a sign indicating that the window would open again at 8:00 A.M. The door to Records was locked, but I could tell there were a couple of people working, probably data-processing technicians entering the day’s warrants into the system. The small front counter wasn’t currently manned, but I managed to lean over, peering into the records department around the corner to the right.A uniformed officer spotted me and broke away from a conversation with a civilian clerk. He moved in my direction. “Can I help you?”“I just talked to Lieutenant Dolan over at St. Terry’s. He and Detective Phillips are letting me look at some files. There should be a set of photographs he said I could take.”“The name was Kepler, right? Lieutenant just called. I have ’em right back here. You want to come on through?”“Thanks.”The officer depressed a button, releasing the door lock. I went through into a back hallway and turned right. The officer reappeared in the doorway to Records and Identification. “We got a desk back here if you want to take a seat.”I read through the file with care, making notes as I went. Janice Kepler had given me much of the same material, but there were many interdepartmental memos and notes that hadn’t been part of her packet. I found the witness interviews the police had conducted with Hector Moreno, J. D. Burke, and Serena Bonney, whose home address and phone number I jotted down. There were additional interviews with Lorna’s family, her former boss, Roger Bonney, and the very Danielle Rivers I was hoping to meet on lower State Street tonight. Again, I made a note of home addresses and telephone numbers. This was information I could develop on my own, but why pass it up? Lieutenant Dolan had left word that I could photocopy anything I needed. I took copies of countless pages. I’d probably interview many of the same people, and it would be instructive to compare their current opinions and observations with those made at the time. Finally I turned my attention to the crime scene photographs.In some ways, it’s hard to know which is more sordid, the pornography of sex or the pornography of homicide. Both speak of violence, the broken and debased, the humiliations to which we subject one another in the heat of passion. Some forms of sex are as cold-blooded as murder, some kinds of murder as titillating to the perpetrator as a sexual encounter.Decomposition had erased most of the definition from Lorna Kepler’s flesh. The very enzymes embedded in her cells had caused her to disintegrate. The body had been invaded, nature’s little cleaning crew busily at work — maggots as light as a snowfall and as white as thread. It took me many minutes before I could look at the photographs without revulsion. Finally I was able to detach myself. This was simply the reality of death.I was interested in the sight of the cabin in its furnished state. I had seen it empty: sooty and forsaken, full of spiders and mildew, the fusty smell of neglect. Here, in full color and again in black and white, I could see fabric, crowded countertops in use, sofa pillows in disarray, a vase full of sagging flowers in an inch of darkened water, rag rugs, the spindle-lathed wooden chair legs. I could see a pile of mail on the sofa cushion where she’d left it. There was something distasteful about the unexpected glimpses of her living space. Like a houseguest arriving early, who sees the place before the hostess has had the chance to tidy up.Aside from a few photographs meant to orient the viewer, Lorna’s body was the prime subject of most eight-by-ten glossies. She lay on her stomach. Her posture was that of someone sleeping, her limbs arranged in the classic chalk outline that marks the position of the corpse in any TV show. No Wood, no emesis. It was hard to imagine what she was doing when she went down — answering the front door, running for the telephone. She wore a bra and underpants, her jogging clothes tossed in a pile close by. Her long dark hair still carried its sheen, a tumble of glossy strands. In the light of the flashbulb, small white maggots glowed like a spray of seed pearls. I slipped the pictures back in the manila envelope and tucked them in my handbag.
