---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "K Is for Killer A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_009.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - K Is for Killer A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["like", "could", "said", "lorna", "got", "serena", "time", "get", "night", "see", "know", "back", "thought", "make", "one", "think", "door", "light", "woman", "look", "roger", "guy", "remember", "little", "place"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/KIsforKillerAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit009html

---


Unknown
Chapter 8It was close to one-thirty in the morning when I parked my VW in the little parking lot outside the emergency entrance to St. Terry’s Hospital. After my conversation with Danielle, Cheney had dropped me back at my place. I moved in through the squeaking gate and around to the back. I heard Cheney give his horn a short toot, and then he took off. The night sky was still clear, bright with stars, but I could see patchy clouds collecting at the western edge as predicted. An airplane moved across my field of vision, a distant dot of red winking among the pinpricks of white, the sound trailing behind it like a banner advertising flight. The final quarter of the moon had narrowed to the curved silver of a shepherd’s crook, a cloud like a wisp of cotton caught in its crescent. I could have sworn I still heard the booming music that had shaken Neptune’s Palace. In reality, the club was less than a mile from my apartment, and I suppose it was possible the sound might have carried. It was more likely a stereo or a car radio in much closer range. Against the drumming of the high tide at the ocean half a block away, the faint thump of bass was a muted counterpoint, brooding, silky, and indistinct.I paused, keys in hand, and leaned my head briefly against the door to my place. I was tired, but curiously disinterested in sleep. I’ve always been a day person, thoroughly addicted to early rising and morning sunshine in a nine-to-five world. I might work late on occasion, but for the most part I’m home by early evening and sound asleep by eleven. Tonight, yet again, I was nudged by restlessness. Some long suppressed aspect of my personality was being activated, and I could feel myself respond. I wanted to talk to Serena Bonney, the nurse who’d discovered Lorna’s body. Somewhere in the accumulating verbal portrait of Lorna Kepler was the key to her death. I went back through the gate and closed it quietly behind me.The emergency room had an air of abandonment. The sliding glass doors opened with a hush, and I moved into the quiet of the blue-and-gray space. There were lights on in the reception area, but the patient registration windows had been closed for hours. To the left, behind a small partition with its wall-mounted pay telephones, the waiting room was empty, the TV a square of blank gray. I peered to the right, toward the examining rooms. Most were dark, with the surrounding curtains pulled back and secured on overhead tracks. I could smell freshly perked coffee wafting from a little kitchenette at the rear of the facility. A young black woman in a white lab coat came out of a doorway marked “Linens.” She was small and pretty. She paused when she spotted me, flashing a smile. “Oh, I’m sorry. I didn’t know anyone was here. Can I help you?”“I’m looking for Serena Bonney. Is she working this shift?”The woman glanced at her watch. “She should be back shortly. She’s on her break. You want to have a seat? The TV’s on the blink, but there’s lots of reading material.”“Thanks.”For the next fifteen minutes, I read outdated issues of Family Circle magazine: articles about children, health and fitness, nutrition, home decorating, and inexpensive home-building projects meant for Dad in his spare time — a wooden bench, a treehouse, a rustic shelf to support Mom’s picturesque garden of container herbs. To me, it was like reading about life on an alien planet. All the ads showed such perfect women. Most were thirty years old, white, and had flawless complexions. Their teeth were snowy and even. None of them had wide bottoms or kangaroo pouches that pulled their slacks out of shape. There was no sign of cellulite, spider veins, or breasts drooping down to their waists. These perfect women lived in well-ordered houses with gleaming floors, an inconceivable array of home appliances, oversize fluffy mutts, and no visible men. I guess Dad was relegated to the office between his woodworking projects. Intellectually I understood that these were all highly paid models simply posing as housewives for the purpose of selling Kotex, floor covering, and dog food. Their lives were probably as far removed from housewifery as mine was. But what did you do if you actually were a housewife, confronted with all these images of perfection on the hoof? From my perspective, I couldn’t see any connection at all between my lifestyle (hookers, death, celibacy, handguns, and fast food) and the lifestyle depicted in the magazine, which was probably just as well. What would I do with a fluffy mutt and containers full of dill and marjoram?“I’m Serena Bonney. Did you want to see me?”I looked up. The nurse in the doorway was in her early forties, a good-size woman, maybe five feet ten. She wasn’t obese by any stretch, but she carried a lot of weight on her frame. The women in her family probably described themselves as “hearty peasant stock.”I set the magazine aside and got to my feet, holding out my hand. “Kinsey Millhone,” I said. “Lorna Kepler’s mother hired me to look into her death.”“Again?” she remarked as she shook my hand.“Actually, the case is still open. Can I take a few minutes of your time?”“It’s a funny hour for an investigation.”“I should apologize for that. I wouldn’t ordinarily bother you at work, but I’ve been suffering insomnia for the last couple of nights, and I thought I might as well take advantage of the fact that you’re working.”“I don’t really know much, but I’ll do what I can. Why don’t you come on into the back? It’s quiet at the moment, but that may not last long.”We moved past two examining rooms and into a small, sparsely furnished office. Like the nurses upstairs, she was dressed in ordinary street clothes: a white cotton blouse, beige gabardine pants, and a matching vest. The crepe-soled shoes marked her as someone who stood for long hours on her feet. Also her wristwatch, like a meat thermometer with a sweeping second hand. Serena paused at the door frame and leaned out into the hall. “I’ll be in here if you need me, Joan.”“No problem,” came the reply.Serena left the door ajar, positioning her chair so she could keep an eye on the corridor. “Sorry you had to wait. I was up on the medical floor. My father was readmitted a couple of days ago, and I try to peek in at him every chance I get.” She had a wide, unlined face and high cheekbones. Her teeth were straight and square, but slightly discolored, perhaps the result of illness or poor nutrition in her youth. Her eyes were light green, her brows pale.“Is his illness serious?” I sat down on a chrome chair with a seat padded in blue tweed.“He had a massive heart attack a year ago and had a pacemaker put in. He’s been having problems with it, and they wanted to check it out. He tends to be a bit obstreperous. He’s seventy-five, but very active. He practically runs the Colgate Water Board, and he hates to miss a meeting. He thrives on adrenaline.”“Your father isn’t Clark Esselmann, by any chance?”“You know him?”“I know his reputation. I had no idea. He’s always raising hell with the developers.” He’d been involved in local politics for fifteen years, since he’d sold his real estate company and retired in splendor. From what I’d heard, he had a rough temper and a tongue that could shift from saltiness to eloquence depending on the subject. He was stubborn and outspoken, a respectable board member for half a dozen charities.She smiled. “That’s him,” she said. She slid a hand through her hair, which was coppery, a cross between red and dark gold. It looked as though she’d had some kind of body permanent, because the curl seemed too pronounced to be entirely natural. The cut was short, the style uncomplicated. I pictured her running a brush through her hair after her morning shower. Her hands were big and her nails blunt cut but nicely manicured. She spent money on herself, but not in any way that seemed flashy. Suffering illness or injury, I’d have trusted her on sight.I murmured something innocuous and then changed the focus of the conversation. “What can you tell me about Lorna?”“I didn’t know her well. I should probably say that up front.”“Janice mentioned that you’re married to the fellow Lorna worked for at the water treatment plant.”“More or less,” she said. “Roger and I have been separated for about eighteen months. I’ll tell you, the last few years have been hellish, to say the least. My marriage fell apart, my father had a heart attack, and then Mother died. After that, Daddy’s health problems only got worse. Lorna house-sat for me when I needed to get away.”“You met her through your husband?”“Yes. She worked for Roger for a little over three years, so I’d run into her if I popped in at the plant. I’d see her at the employee picnics in the summer and the annual Christmas party. I thought she was fascinating. Clearly a lot smarter than the job required.”“The two of you got along?”“We got along fine.”I paused, wondering how to phrase the question that occurred to me. “If it’s not too personal, can you tell me about your divorce?”“My divorce?” she said.“Who filed? Was it you or your husband?”She cocked her head. “That’s a curious question. What makes you ask?”“I was wondering if your separation from Roger had anything to do with Lorna.”Serena’s laugh was quick and startled. “Oh, good heavens. Not at all,” she said. “We’d been married ten years, and we both got bored. He was the one who broached the subject, but he certainly didn’t get any grief from me. I understood where he was coming from. He feels he has a dead-end job. He likes what he does, but he’s never going to get rich. He’s one of those guys whose life hasn’t quite come up to his expectations. He pictured himself retired by the age of fifty. Now he’s past that, and he still hasn’t got a dime. On the other hand, I not only have a career I’m passionate about, but I’ll have family money coming to me one of these days. Living with that got to be too much for him. We’re still on friendly terms, we’re just not intimate, which you’re welcome to verify with him.”“I’ll take your word for it,” I said, though of course I’d check. “What about the house-sitting? How’d Lorna end up doing that?”“I don’t remember exactly. I probably mentioned in passing that I needed someone. Her place was small and remarkably crude. I thought she’d enjoy spending time in a more comfortable setting.”“How often did she sit?”“Five or six times altogether, I’d guess. She hadn’t done it for a while, but Roger thought she was still willing. I could check my calendar at home if it seems relevant.”“At the moment I don’t know what’s relevant and what’s not. Were you satisfied with the job she did?”“Sure. She was responsible; fed and walked the dog, watered plants, brought in the newspaper and the mail. It saved me the kennel fees, and I liked having someone in the house while I was gone. After Roger and I split, I moved back in to my parents’ house. I was interested in a change of scene, and Dad needed some unofficial supervision because of his health. Mother’s cancer had already been diagnosed and she was doing chemo. This was an arrangement that suited all of us.”“So you were living at your father’s at the time Lorna died?”“That’s right. He’s been under doctor’s care, but he’s what they call a ‘noncompliant’ patient. I had plans to be out of town, and I didn’t want him in the house alone. Dad was adamant. He swore he didn’t need help, but I insisted. What’s the point of a getaway weekend if I’m worried about him the whole time? As a matter of fact, that’s what I was trying to set up when I went to her place and found her. I’d tried calling for days, and there was never any answer. Roger told me she was taking a couple of weeks’ accrued vacation, but she was due back any day. I wasn’t sure when she’d get in, so I thought I’d stop by and leave her a little note. I parked near the cabin, and I was just getting out of my car when I noticed the smell, not to mention the flies.”“You knew what it was?”“Well, I didn’t know it was her, but I knew it was something dead. The odor’s quite distinct.”I shifted the subject slightly. “Everyone I’ve interviewed so far has talked about how beautiful she was. I wondered if other women regarded her as a threat.”“I never did. Of course, I can’t speak for anyone else,” she said. “Men seemed to find her more appealing than women, but I never saw her flirt. Again, I’m only talking about the occasions when I saw her.”“From what I hear, she liked living on the edge,” I said. I introduced the matter without framing a question, interested in what kind of response I might get. Serena held my gaze, but she made no reply. So far she’d tended to editorialize on every question I asked. I ran the query one more round. “Were you aware that she was involved in other activities?”“I don’t understand the question. What kind of activities are you referring to?”“Of a sexual nature.”“Ah. That. Yes. I assume you’re referring to the money she made from the hotel trade. Humping for hire,” she said drolly. “I didn’t think it was my place to bring that up.”“Was it common knowledge?”“I don’t think Roger knew, but I certainly did.”“How did you find out?”“I’m not sure. I really can’t remember. Indirectly, I think. I ran into her at the Edgewater one night. No, wait a minute. I remember what happened. She came into the ER with a broken nose. She had some explanation, but it didn’t make much sense. I’ve seen assault and battery often enough that I wasn’t fooled. I didn’t say so to her, but I knew something was going on.”“Could it have been a boyfriend? Someone she was living with?”I could hear voices in the hallway.She glanced over at the door. “I guess it could have been, but as far as I knew she was never in any kind of steady relationship. Anyway, the story she told seemed suspect. I’ve forgotten what it was now, but it seemed phony as hell. And it wasn’t just the broken nose. It was that in conjunction with some other things.”“Such as?”“Her wardrobe, her jewelry. She was subtle about it, but I couldn’t help noticing.”“When was the incident that brought her to the emergency room?”“I don’t remember exactly. Probably two years ago. Check with Medical Records. They can give you the date.”“You don’t know hospitals. I’d have better luck getting access to state secrets,” I said.A baby had begun to cry fretfully in the waiting room.“Does it make a difference?”“It might. Suppose the guy who punched her decided to make it permanent.”“Oh. I see your point.” Serena’s eyes strayed to the open door again as Joan went past.“But she didn’t confide in you when she came in?”“Not at all. After I saw her at the Edgewater, I put two and two together.”“Seems like a bit of a leap.”“Not if you’d seen her the night I ran into her. Part of it, too, was the guy she was with. Older, very slick. Gold jewelry, gorgeous suit. Clearly a man who had money to burn. I saw them in the bar and later in the boutique where she was trying on clothes. He dropped a bundle that night. Four Escada outfits, and she was modeling a filth.”“I assume Escada is expensive.”“Dear God.” She laughed, patting herself on the chest.Lights were going on in the examining cubicle across from us. I could hear the murmuring of voices: fussy baby, shrill mom speaking rapid-fire Spanish.Serena went on. “It happened again within the month, as I remember. Same situation, different guy, same look. It didn’t take a rocket scientist to figure it out.”“You think one of these guys knocked her around?”“I think it’s a better explanation than the one she gave. I’m not saying this is always true, but some guys in that age bracket start having trouble with impotency. They pick up high-priced call girls and spread the money around. Champagne and gifts, a gorgeous babe in tow. It looks good on the surface, and everybody thinks what a stud he is. What these men are looking for is a one-up relationship because they can’t ‘get it up’ any other way. He’s paying for the service, so if the equipment doesn’t work, it’s her fault, not his, and he can express his disappointment any way he likes.”“With his fist.”“If you want to look at it from his point of view, why not? He’s paid for her. She’s his. If he can’t perform, he’s got her to blame and he can paste her in the chops.”“Some deal. She keeps the cash and the clothes in exchange for the punishment.”“She doesn’t always get punished. Some of these guys like to be punished themselves. Beaten, humiliated. They like to have their little fannies spanked for being bad, bad, bad.”“Did Lorna tell you this?”“No, but I’ve heard it from a couple of other hookers on the local circuit. I also did some reading on the subject when I was getting my degree. I used to see them come in, and I’d be incensed at the way they were treated, furious because I didn’t really understand what was going on. I’d jump to the rescue, trying to save them from the ‘bad’ guys. For all the good that did. In an odd way, I’m a better nurse if I can stay detached.”“And that’s what you did with her?”“Exactly. I felt compassion, but I didn’t try to ‘fix’ her. It was none of my business. And she didn’t see it as a problem, at least as far as I knew.”“You seem to spend a lot of time at the Edgewater. Is that where the singles hang out these days?”“The singles in our age group, yes. I’m sure the kids would find it stuffy beyond belief and the prices astronomical. Frankly, it makes married life look pretty good.”“Do you happen to remember any dates when you saw her? If I check with the hotel, it helps to pin it down.”She thought about that briefly. “Once I was with a bunch of girlfriends. We get together to celebrate birthdays. That time it was mine, so it must have been early in March. We don’t always manage to get together on the exact date, but it would have been a Friday or Saturday because that’s when we play.”“That was last March?”“Must have been.”“Was this before the broken nose or afterward?”“I have no idea.”“Did Lorna know you knew?”“Well, she saw me that night and maybe twice before that. Since Roger and I had separated, I was out with friends almost every weekend. Lorna and I didn’t come right out and discuss her ‘career,’ but there were veiled references.” Serena had used the fingers of both hands to form the quote marks around the word career.“I’m just curious. How do you happen to remember in such detail? Most people can’t recall what happened yesterday.”“The police asked me most of this, and it stuck in my mind. Also, I’ve given it a lot of thought. I don’t have a clue why she was murdered, and it bothers me.”“You believe she was murdered?”“I think it’s likely, yes.”“Were you aware that she was involved in pornography?”Serena frowned slightly. “In what way?”“She starred in a video. Someone sent the cassette to her parents about a month ago.”“What was it, like a snuff film? S and M?”“No. It was fairly pedestrian in terms of the story and subject matter, but Mrs. Kepler suspects it may be linked to Lorna’s death.”“Do you?”“I’m not being paid to have opinions at this point. I like to keep my options open.”“I understand,” she said. “It’s like making a diagnosis. No point in ruling out the obvious.”There was a knock at the door frame and Joan peered in. “Sorry to interrupt, but we’ve got a baby over here I’d like you to take a look at. I’ve got a call in to the resident, but I think you should see him.”Serena rose to her feet. “Let me know if there’s anything else,” she said to me as she moved toward the door.“I’ll do that. And thanks.”I drove back to my place through deserted streets. I was beginning to feel at home in the late night world. The nature of the darkness shifts from hour to hour. Once the bars close down and traffic dissipates, what emerges is the utter stillness of three a.m. The intersections are empty. Traffic lights are bright O’s of red and sea-foam green in a dazzling string that you can see for half a mile.Clouds were pouring in. A dense ground fog, like cotton batting, was laid across the mountains, and the gray hills were pocked with streetlights against the backdrop of rolling mist. Most of the residential windows I saw were dark. Where an occasional light burned; I pictured students churning out last minute papers, the nightmares of the young. Or maybe the lights burned for recent insomniacs like me.A police car cruised slowly along Cabana Boulevard, the uniformed officer turning to stare at me as I passed. I took a left onto my street and found a parking place. I locked the car. The sky was velvety with clouds now, the stars completely obscured. Darkness hugged the ground, while the sky was tinged with eerie light, like dark gray construction paper smudged with white chalk. Behind me, I heard the low hum of air moving swiftly through the spokes of a bike. I turned in time to see the man on the bicycle passing. From the rear, his taillight and the strips of reflecting tape on his heels made him look like someone juggling three small points of light. The effect was oddly unsettling, a circus act of the spirits performed solely for me.I went through the gate and let myself into my apartment, flipping on the light. Everything was orderly, just as I’d left it. The quiet was profound. I could feel a little nudge of anxiety, made up of weariness, the late hour, empty rooms around me. I wasn’t going to be able to sleep at this point. It was like hunger — once the peak moment passed, the appetite diminished and you could simply do without. Food, sleep... what difference did it make? The metabolism shifts into overdrive, calling up energy from some other source. If I’d gone to bed at nine or even ten o’clock, I could have slept through the night. But now my sleep permit had reached its expiration point. Having stayed awake this long, I was consigned to further wakefulness.My body was both fatigued and fired up. I dropped my handbag and jacket on the chair by the door. I glanced at the answering machine: no messages. Did I have any wine on the premises? No, I did not. I checked the contents of the refrigerator, which showed nothing of culinary interest. My pantry was typically barren: a few stray cans and dried items that, singly or in combination, would never constitute anything remotely edible, unless you favored uncooked lentils with maple syrup. The peanut-butter jar had concentric swirl marks in the bottom, as if the rest of it had drained away. I found a kitchen knife and scraped the sides of the jar, eating the accumulated peanut butter off the blade as I walked around. “This is really pitiful,” I said, laughing, but actually I didn’t mind a bit.Idly I flipped on the TV set. Lorna’s video was still in the VCR. I touched the remote control, and the tape began to run again. I had no intention of watching any late night sex, but I went through the credits twice. The night before, I’d tried directory assistance in San Francisco, hoping for a telephone number for the production company Cyrenaic Cinema. In the credits, the producer, director, and film editor were all listed by name: Joseph Ayers, Morton Kasselbaum, and Chester Ellis respectively. What the hell, telephone operators are awake all night.I tried the names in reverse order, bombing out on the first two. When I got to the producer, I picked up a hit. The operator sang, “Thank you for using AT and T,” and a recording kicked in. A mechanical voice came on the line and recited Joseph Ayers’s number for me twice.I made a note, then picked up the phone and called directory assistance in San Francisco again, this time checking for a listing in the names of the other players, Russell Turpin and Nancy Dobbs. She wasn’t listed, but there were two Turpins with the first initial R, one on Haight and one on Greenwich. I wrote down both numbers. At the risk of wasting my time and Janice Kepler’s money, a trip north might actually be worth a shot. If the contacts didn’t pan out, at least there was hope of eliminating the porno angle as a factor in her daughter’s death.I put a call through to Frankie’s Coffee Shop, and Janice answered on the second ring. “Janice. This is Kinsey. I have a question for you.”She said, “Fire away. We’re not busy.”I brought her up to date on my conversations with Lieutenant Dolan and Serena Bonney, and then filled her in on the minisurvey I’d done of the pornographic film crew. “I think it might be worthwhile to talk to the producer and the other actor.”“I remember him,” she cut in.“Yeah, well, between Turpin and this film producer, I’m hoping we can satisfy some questions. I’ll try to contact both by phone in advance, but it looks like it’d make sense to make a quick trip. If I can set up a few appointments, I thought I’d hit the road.”“You’re going to drive?”“I’d thought to.”“Don’t you have a dinky little VW? Why not fly? I would, if I were you.”“I guess I could,” I said dubiously. “On a short hop like that, though, the plane fare will be outrageous. I’ll have to rent a car up there, too. Motel, meals...”“That sounds okay to me. Just save your receipts and we’ll reimburse you when you get back.”“What about Mace? Did you tell him about the tape?”“Well, I told you I would. He was shocked, of course, and then he got mad as hell. Not with her, but whoever put her up to it.”“What’s his feeling about the investigation itself? He didn’t seem that thrilled yesterday.”“He told me just what he told you,” she said. “If this is what it takes to make me happy, he’ll go along with it.”“Great. I’ll probably fly up sometime tomorrow afternoon and talk to you as soon as I get back.”“Have a good flight,” she said.
