---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "K Is for Killer A Kinsey Millhone Novel - index_split_021.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - K Is for Killer A Kinsey Millhone Novel"
tags: ["said", "back", "could", "roger", "one", "lorna", "went", "see", "like", "know", "go", "danielle", "right", "thought", "two", "cheney", "guy", "frame", "turned", "got", "might", "hand", "left", "light", "put"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/KIsforKillerAKinseyMillhoneNovel-indexsplit021html

---


Unknown
Chapter 20I went through the kitchen toward the front of the house. In the foyer, I took a right and headed up the stairs. I had no idea how the bedrooms were laid out. I moved down the hallway from room to room. At the end of the corridor, there was an intersecting T with a sitting room on the right and a bedroom on the left. I could see Serena lying on a four-poster bed, covered with a light blanket. The room was sunny and spacious, yellow-and-white paper on the walls in a tiny rosette print. There were white curtains at the window, and all the woodwork was done in white.Serena didn’t seem to be asleep. I knocked on the door frame. She turned her head and looked at me. I didn’t think she’d been crying. Her face was pale, unmarked by tears, the expression in her eyes more one of resignation than sorrow, if one can make that distinction. She said, “Are they finished out there?”I shook my head. “It’ll probably be a while. You want me to call anyone?”“Not really. I called Roger. He’s coming over as soon as he can get away from the plant. Did you want something?”“I need to ask you a question, if you can tolerate the intrusion.”“That’s all right. What is it?”“Do you use the pool on a daily basis?”“No. I never liked swimming. That was Daddy’s passion. He had the lap pool put in about five years ago.”“Does someone else here swim? One of the maids, or the cook?”She thought about it briefly. “Occasionally a friend might call and ask to use the pool, but no one else,” she said. “Why?”“I heard a taped conversation under circumstances I’d prefer not to go into. Lorna was talking to a man who used the phrase ‘she goes in at the same time every day’. I thought the reference might be to swimming, but at the time it made no sense. I was just wondering if there was a ‘she’ on the premises who went in ‘at the same time every day.’ “She smiled wanly. “Just the dog, and she only goes in when Dad does. You saw her the other night. They play fetch, and then when he does his laps, she swims alongside him.”I could feel a flicker of confusion. “I thought the dog was a male. Isn’t his name Max?”“It’s Maxine. Max for short,” she said. “Actually, her real name’s much longer because she’s pedigreed.”“Ah, Maxine. How’s she doing? I didn’t see her downstairs. I thought she might be up here with you.”Serena struggled into a sitting position. “Oh, heavens. Thanks for reminding me. She’s still at the groomers. I took her over first thing this morning. The shop owner even came in early to accommodate the appointment. I was supposed to pick her up at eleven, but it completely slipped my mind. Ask Mrs. Holloway if she’d go over there; at least call and let them know what’s happened. Poor Max, poor girl. She’s going to die without Daddy. The two of them were inseparable.”“Mrs. Holloway’s the housekeeper? I haven’t seen her, either, but I can call if you like.”“Please. Maybe Roger can pick her up on his way over here. It’s Montebello Pet Groomers in the lower village. The number’s on the planning center in the kitchen. I don’t want to put you to any trouble.”“It’s no trouble,” I said. “Are you okay?”“Really, I’m fine. I just want some time alone, and then I’ll be down. I’ll probably have to talk to the detective again, anyway. I can’t believe this is happening. It’s all so grotesque.”“Take your time,” I said. “I’ll tell the pet groomers someone’s picking Max up later. You want this closed? It might be quieter.”“All right. And thank you.”“That’s all right. I’m sorry about your father.”“I appreciate that.”I left the room, pulling the door shut behind me. I went down to the kitchen and put a call through to the grooming shop. I identified myself as a friend of Serena’s, indicating that her father had died unexpectedly. The woman was extremely gracious, expressing her condolences. The shop was closing at three, and she said she could just as easily drop Max off on her way home. I left a note to that effect, assuming that Mrs. Holloway or Serena would spot it.By the time I returned to the patio, the bodies had been removed and the photographer had packed up and left. There was no sign of the electrician, the coroner, or his assistant. The fingerprint technician was now working over by the pool equipment. At the near end of the pool, I saw Cheney talking to the younger of the two detectives, his buddy Hawthorn, I gathered, though he never introduced us. When he spotted me, he finished up his conversation and crossed the patio to meet me. “I was wondering where you went. They’re nearly done here. You want to head out?”“We might as well,” I said.We didn’t say much until we’d left the house, walking down the driveway to the spot where Cheney’s car was parked. I said, “So what’s the current theory? It couldn’t have been an accident. That’s ludicrous.”Cheney unlocked the door and held it open for me. “Doesn’t look like it on the surface, but we’ll see what they come up with.”He closed the door on my side, effectively cutting off communication. I leaned over and unlocked the door on his side, but I had to wait until he’d gone around and let himself in. He slid under the steering wheel.“Quit being such a stickler and play the game,” I said. “What do you think?”“I think it’s dumb to guess.”“Oh, come on, Cheney. It had to be murder. Somebody busted out the pool light and then disconnected the GFI. You don’t believe it was an accident. You’re the one who told Hawthorn there might be a peripheral connection between Lorna’s death and Esselmann’s.”“What connection?” he said perversely.“That’s what I’m asking you!” I said. “God, you’re aggravating. Okay, I’ll go first. Here’s what I think.”He rolled his eyes, smiling, and turned the key in the ignition. He put his arm across the seat and peered out of his rear window, backing out of the gate with a breathtaking carelessness. When he reached the road, he threw the gear into first and peeled out. On the way back to my place, I told him about Leda’s surreptitious tape recording. I didn’t have the transcript with me, but the text was so sketchy that it wasn’t difficult to recollect. “I think the guy is telling her about his scheme. He’s come up with a way to kill Esselmann, and he’s feeling clever. Maybe he thought she’d find it amusing, but she obviously doesn’t. You ought to hear her on the tape. She’s pissed off and upset, and he’s trying to act like it’s all a big joke. The problem is, once he’s told her, he’s left himself open. If he actually intends to go through with it, she’ll know it was him. Given her reaction, he can’t trust her to keep quiet.”“So what’s your theory? Bottom line,” he said.“I think she was killed because she knew too much.”He made a face. “Yeah, but Lorna died back in April. If the guy wanted to kill Esselmann, why wait this long? If the only thing that worried him was her blowing the whistle, why not kill the old guy the minute she’s dead?”“I don’t know,” I said. “Maybe he had to wait until things cooled down. If he’d moved too quickly, he might have called attention to himself.”He was listening, but I could tell he wasn’t convinced. “Go back to the murder scheme. What’s the guy intend to do?”“I think he’s talking about a variation on what actually happened. Clark and Max go through the same routine every morning. He throws a stick into the lap pool and she fetches. She’s a retriever. She was born for this stuff. After they play, the two swim. So here’s the deal. Suppose the pool’s been electrified. He throws the stick. She leaps in and takes a big jolt. He sees she’s in trouble. He goes in after her and he dies, too. It looks like an accident, some freaky set of circumstances everyone feels bad about. Poor guy. Tried to save his doggie and died in the process. In reality, Serena took the dog to the groomer’s, so Clark went in swimming by himself. Instead of Clark and the dog, you have Clark and the gardener, but the setup’s the same.”Cheney was quiet for a moment. “How do you know it’s Lorna on the tape?” he said. “You’ve never heard her voice. The guy could be talking to Serena.”“Why would she be there in the first place?” I asked promptly. I noticed it was more fun to ask questions than to have to answer them.“Haven’t made that part up yet. The point is, Serena’s upset because she doesn’t want the dog used as bait, so she takes Max off to the groomer’s to get her out of the way.”“I’ve talked to Serena. The voice didn’t sound like hers.”“Wait a minute. That’s cheating. You told me the voices were distorted. You’ve talked to J. D. and you said it didn’t sound like him, either.”“That’s true,” I said reluctantly. “But you’re suggesting Serena killed her own father, and I don’t believe it. Why would she do it?”“The guy’s got a lot of money. Doesn’t she inherit his estate?”“Probably, but why kill him? He’d already had a heart attack, and his health was failing. All she had to do was wait, and probably not very long at that. Besides, I’ve seen her with him. There was nothing but affection. An occasional complaint about his stubbornness, but you can tell she admired him. Anyway, I’ll see if I can get the tape back and you can hear it for yourself.”“Who has it?”“Leda. She sent J. D. over to pick it up last night. Or that was his claim. Actually, in the suspect department, they’re not bad candidates. Both of them were nervous I’d give the tape to the police. Neither has an alibi. And you know what J. D. does for a living? He’s an electrician. If anybody’d know how to hot-wire a lap pool, he would.”“The town’s full of people who’d know enough to do that,” he said. “Anyway, if your theory’s correct, then whoever killed Esselmann had to be someone who knew the house, the pool, and the routine with the dog.”“That’s right.”“Which brings us back to Serena.”“Maybe,” I said slowly. “Though Roger Bonney’s another one who’d know all that.”“What’s his motive?”“I have no idea, but he’s certainly the link between Lorna and Esselmann.”“Well, there you have it,” Cheney snorted. “Now if Roger knows Stubby, the circle will be complete, and we can charge him with murder.” Cheney was being facetious, but he’d made a good point, and I could feel a ripple of uneasiness.My thoughts veered to Danielle and the man who’d walked off into the darkness of the alleyway. “How do we know this isn’t the same guy who went after Danielle? Maybe the attack on her connects up to everything else.”Cheney had reached my place, and he slowed to a stop. He pulled on the brake and put the car in neutral, turning to face me, his smile gone. “Do me a favor and think about something else. It’s a fun game, but you know as well as I do it doesn’t mean jack.”“I’m just trying on theories, like throwing dinner plates against the wall to see if one will stick.”He reached over and gave my hair a little tug. “Just watch yourself. Even if you’re right and all these things are related, you can’t go tearing off on your own,” he said. “This case belongs to the county sheriff. It’s got nothing to do with you.”“I know.”“Then don’t give me that look. It’s nothing personal.”“It is personal. Especially when it comes to Danielle,” I said.“Would you quit worrying? She’s safe.”“For how long? Any day now they’ll move her out of ICU. Hospitals aren’t exactly high security. You ought to see the people walking in and out of there.”“You’re right about that. Let me think some and see what I can do. We’ll talk soon, okay?” He smiled, and I found myself smiling in return.“Okay.”“Good. I’ll give you the number for my pager. Let me know if anything turns up.”“I’ll do that,” I said. He recited the number and had me repeat it back to him before he put the car in gear again.I stood at the curb and watched the Mazda pull away and then moved through the gate and went around to the rear. It was Saturday afternoon, close to three o’clock. I let myself into my apartment. I made a note of Cheney’s pager number and left it on my desk. I felt I was in a state of suspended animation. The answer was hovering somewhere on the periphery, like spots in my field of vision that moved sideways every time I turned to look. There had to be some chain of events, something that linked all the pieces of the puzzle. I needed a way to distract myself, setting all the questions aside until a few answers came. I went up the spiral stairs to the loft and changed clothes, pulling on my sweatsuit and my jogging shoes. I tucked the house key in my pocket and trotted over to Cabana Boulevard.The day was crisp and clear, the midafternoon sun pouring over the distant mountains like a golden syrup. The ocean was a dazzling carpet of diamonds, the air freshly scented with the briny smell of the sea. The run was a pleasure, bringing back in full measure the joys of physical activity. I did four miles, feeling strong, and when I came back I took a shower and started over, eating cereal and toast while I read the paper I hadn’t had time for that morning. I went out and ran an errand or two, picking up groceries, stopping at a wine store. It was close to six o’clock when I finally felt relaxed enough to sit down at my desk and flip the light on.I went back to my index cards. I was going through the motions, not really on the track of anything in particular, just trying to keep busy until I figured out what to do next. I glanced down at the sack that held the broken picture frames. Shit. Of course, I’d forgotten to take Danielle’s bedding to the cleaners before it closed, but at least I could switch the frames. I moved over to the kitchen counter with the new frames I’d picked up. I put the wastebasket nearby and pulled the photographs from the paper bag. There were four eight-by-ten enlargements, all in color. I removed the frame and the matting from the first, pausing to study the image: three cats lounging on a picnic table. A sleek gray tabby was in the process of jumping down, apparently not that happy about the photographic immortality. The other two cats were long-haired, one pale cream and one black, staring at the camera with expressions of arrogance and disinterest respectively. On the back she’d written the date and the cats’ names: Smokey, Tigger, and Cheshire.As I removed the photo from the cracked frame, the glass separated into two pieces. I tucked both in the trash can and tossed the frame in after them. I pulled out a new frame and peeled off the price tag, sliding the mat and the cardboard backing out of the frame. I tucked the photo between the backing and the mat, turning it over to make sure the image was straight. I eased the three layers — mat, photo, and backing — into the space between the glass and the series of staples that were sticking out of the frame. I turned it back again. It looked good.I picked up the second photograph and went through the same process. The glass was only cracked across one corner, but the frame itself was unsalvageable. This photograph showed two young men and a young woman on a sailboat, everyone with beer cans, sunburns, and wind-tangled hair. Danielle had probably taken the picture herself. It must have been a good day with good friends at a time in her life when she was still in possession of her innocence. I’ve been on outings like it. You come home dog-tired and dirty, but you never forget.In the third picture, Danielle was posed under a white trellised arch in the company of a young clean-cut guy. From the dress she was wearing, complete with an orchid on her wrist, I guessed this was taken at her high school prom. It was nice getting a glimpse of her private life, images of her as she’d been before. She had entered the life as surely as a novice entering a convent, with a gap just as wide between past and present.The last picture had been rematted, a wide band of gray reducing the framed image to its two central figures: Danielle and Lorna dressed up and sitting in a booth. It looked like a commercial photograph, taken by a roving photographer who made a living snapping pictures on the spot. Hard to tell where this was taken, Los Angeles or Vegas, some glitzy nightclub, with dinner and dancing. In the background, I could see a portion of a bandstand and a potted plant. Champagne glasses on the table in front of them. The frame was cheap, but the wide gray matting was a nice choice for the subject matter, isolating the two of them.Both women were looking elegant, seated at a found table in a black leather-padded booth. Lorna was so beautiful: dark-haired, hazel-eyed, with a perfect oval face. Her expression was grave, with just the smallest hint of a smile on her lips. She wore a black satin cocktail dress, with long sleeves and a square, low-cut neckline. The diamond hoop earrings sparkled at her ears. Danielle wore kelly green, a form-fitting sequined top, probably with a miniskirt, if I knew Danielle’s taste. Her long dark hair had been smoothed into a French roll. I imagined Lorna getting her all dolled up tor a kind of high-class date: two call girls on the town. Along the back of the booth, I could see a man’s hand and arm extending behind Lorna. I could feel my heart begin to thump.I extracted the photograph from the frame and turned it over. With the matting removed, I could see all four people who’d been sitting at the table that night: Roger, Danielle, Lorna, and Stubby Stockton. Oh, man, this is it, I thought. This is it. Maybe not everything, but the heart of the riddle.I carried the photo with me to the telephone and called Cheney’s pager number, punching in my own telephone number and the #sign at the sound of the tone. I hung up. While I waited for him to return my call, I sat at my desk and sorted through my notes, pulling all the index cards on which Roger was mentioned. Most were from my initial interview, with additional notes from my conversation with Serena. I scanned the cards on the bulletin board, but there were no further references. I laid the cards out on my desk like a tarot reading. I found the notes I’d scribbled to myself after my meeting with him. Roger had told me Lorna called him Friday morning. I circled the day and added a question mark, affixing the card to the photograph with a paper clip.The phone rang. “Kinsey Millhone,” I said automatically.“This is Cheney. What’s up?”“I’m not sure. Let me tell you what I came across, and you tell me.” I told him briefly how I’d acquired the photographs, and then I detailed the one I was looking at. “I know you were kidding when you talked about Roger and Stubby, but they did know each other, and well enough to go whoring together somewhere out of town. I also went back through my notes and came across an interesting discrepancy. Roger told me Lorna called him Friday morning, but she couldn’t possibly have done that. She was dead by then.”There was a brief silence. “I don’t see where you’re going with this.”“I have no idea. That’s why I’m calling you,” I said. “I mean, suppose Roger and Stubby were in business together. If Lorna told Roger about her relationship with Esselmann, they could have been using the information to pressure him. Esselmann balked....”“So Stubby killed him? That’s ridiculous. Stubby’s got a lot of irons in the fire. This deal doesn’t work, he’s got another one lined up, and if that fails, he’s got more. Believe me, Stockton is in business to do business. Period. If Esselmann dies, that only sets him back because now he’s gotta wait until someone’s appointed to take Clark’s place, yada, yada, yada...”“I’m not saying Stockton. I think it’s Roger. He’s the one who had access to that pool equipment. He had access to Lorna. He had access to everything. Plus, he knew Danielle. Suppose he and Stockton talked business that night. Danielle’s the only witness.”“How’re you going to prove it? All you have is speculation. This is all air and sunshine. You’ve got nothing concrete. At least, nothing you could take to the DA. He’d never go for it.”“What about the tape?”“That’s not proof of anything. It’s illegal for starters, and you don’t even know it’s Lorna. They could be talking about anything. You ever heard the concept of ‘fruit of the poisonous tree’? I’ve been thinking about this whole business ever since I dropped you off. You got people tampering with the crime scene, tampering with evidence. Any good defense attorney would rip you to shreds.”“What about Roger’s claim Lorna called him Friday morning?”“So the guy was mistaken. She called some other day.”“What if I went in with a wire and had a talk with him. Let me ask —”Cheney cut in, his tone a mixture of impatience and outrage. “Ask him what? We’re not going to wire you. Don’t be asinine. What are you proposing, you go knock on his door? ‘Hi, Rog. It’s Kinsey. Who’d you kill today? Oh, no reason, just curious. Excuse me, would you mind speaking into this artificial flower I’m wearing in my lapel?’ This is not your job. Face it. There’s nothing you can do.”“Bullshit. That’s bullshit.”“Well, it’s bullshit you’re gonna have to live with. We really shouldn’t even be discussing this.”“Cheney, I’m tired of the bad guys winning. I’m sick of watching people get away with murder. How come the law protects them and not us?”“I hear you, Kinsey, but that doesn’t change the facts. Even if you’re right about Roger, you got no way to nail him, so you might as well drop it. Eventually he’ll screw up, and we’ll get him then.”“We’ll see.”“Don’t give me ‘we’ll see.’ You do something stupid and it’s your ass, not his. I’ll talk to you later. I got another call coming in.”I hung up on him, steaming. I knew he was right, but I really hate that stuff, and his being right only made it worse. I sat for a minute and stared at the photograph of Lorna and Danielle. Was I the only one who really cared about them? I held the missing piece of the puzzle, but there were no options open to me, no means of redress. There was something humiliating about my own ineffectiveness. I crossed the room and paced back, feeling powerless. The phone rang again and I snatched up the receiver.“This is Cheney...” His voice was oddly flat.“Hey, great. I was hoping you’d call back. Surely, between us, there’s a way to do this,” I said. I thought he was calling to apologize for being such a hard-ass. I expected him to offer a suggestion about some action we might take, so I was completely unprepared for what came next.“That was St. Terry’s on the line. The ICU nurse. We lost Danielle. She just died,” he said.I felt myself blink, waiting for the punchline. “She died?”“She went into cardiac arrest. I guess they coded her, but it was too late to pull her back.”“Danielle died? That’s absurd. I just saw her last night.”“Kinsey, I’m sorry. The call just came in. I’m as surprised as you are. I hate to be the one to tell you, but I thought you should know.”“Cheney.” My tone was rebuking while his had become compassionate.“You want me to come over?”“No, I don’t want you to come over. I want you to quit fucking with my head,” I snapped. “Why are you doing this?”“I’ll be there in fifteen minutes.”The line clicked out and he was gone.Carefully, I set the receiver in the cradle. Still standing, I put a hand across my mouth. What was this? What was happening? How could Danielle be dead while Roger was beyond reach? At first, I felt nothing. My initial response was a curious blank, no sensation at all attached. I took in the truth content of what Cheney had told me, but there was no corresponding emotional reaction. Like a monkey, I plucked up this bright coin of information and turned it over in my hand. I believed in my head, but I couldn’t comprehend with my heart. I remained motionless for perhaps a minute, and when feelings finally crept back, what I experienced wasn’t grief, but a mounting fury. Like some ancient creature hurtling up from the deep, my rage broke the surface and I struck.I picked up the receiver, put my hand in my jeans pocket, and pulled out the card I’d been given in the limousine. The scribbled number was there, some magical combination of digits that spelled death. I dialed, giving absolutely no thought to what I was doing. I was propelled by the hot urge to act, by the blind need to strike back at the man who had dealt me this blow.After two rings, the phone was picked up on the other end. “Yes?”I said, “Roger Bonney killed Lorna Kepler.”I hung up. I sat down. I felt my face twist with heat, and tears spilled briefly.I went into the bathroom and looked out the window, but the street beyond was dark. I went back to my desk. Oh, Jesus. What had I done? I picked up the phone and dialed the number again. Endless rings. No answer. I put the phone down. Hands shaking, I pulled my gun from the bottom drawer and popped in a fresh clip. I eased the gun into the waistband at the back of my jeans and pulled on my jacket. I grabbed my handbag and car keys, turned out the lights, and locked the door behind me.I hit the 101, heading out toward Colgate. I kept checking my rearview mirror, but there was no sign of the limousine. At Little Pony Road, I took the off-ramp and turned right, continuing past the fairgrounds until I reached the intersection at State. I stopped at the traffic light, drumming my fingers on the steering wheel in impatience, checking my rearview mirror again. Along the main thoroughfare there was only one touch of color, words written out in red neon on the drugstore I spotted. SAV-ON, the sign said. The shopping mall to my left was apparently having a gala all-night sale. Klieg lights pierced the sky. White plastic flags were strung from pole to pole. At the entrance to the parking lot, a clown and two mimes were motioning for passing cars to turn in. The two mimes in whiteface began a playlet between them. I couldn’t tell what silent drama the two were enacting, but one turned and looked at me as I pulled away from the light. I checked back, but all I saw was the painted sorrow on his downturned mouth.I sped past a darkened service station, the bays and gasoline pumps shut down for the night. I could hear a burglar alarm clanging, apparently in a shop close by, but there was no sign of the police and no pedestrians running to see what was wrong. If there were actually burglars in the place, they could take their sweet time. We’re all so accustomed to alarms going off that we pay no attention, assuming the switches have been tripped in error and mean nothing. Six blocks beyond, I crossed a smaller intersection heading up the road that led to the water treatment plant.The area was largely unpopulated. I could see an occasional house on my right, but the fields across the road were scruffy and dotted with boulders. Coyotes yipped and howled in the distance, driven down from the hills by the need for water. It seemed too early in the evening for predators, but the pack was obeying a law of its own. They were hunting tonight, on the scent of prey. I pictured some hapless creature flying across the ground, in fear of its life. The coyote kills quickly, a mercy for its victim, though not much consolation.I turned into the entrance to the treatment plant. Lights were on in the building, and there were four cars out front. I left my handbag in the car, locking it behind me. There was still no sign of the limousine. Then again, the guy wouldn’t use his limo to make a hit, I thought. He’d probably send his goons, and they might well check Roger’s place first, wherever that might be. A county-owned truck had been parked in the drive. As I passed, I put a hand out. The hood was still warm to the touch. I went up the stairs to the lighted entry. I could feel the reassuring bulk of the handgun in the small of my back. I pushed through the glass doors.The receptionist’s desk was empty. Once upon a time Lorna Kepler had sat there. It was curious to imagine her working here day after day, greeting visitors, answering the telephone, exchanging small talk with the control technician and senior treatment mechanics. Maybe it was her last shred of pretense, the final gesture she’d made toward being an ordinary person. On the other hand, she might have found herself genuinely interested in aeration maniforms and flash mix basins.The interior of the building seemed quiet at first. Fluorescent lights glowed against the polished tile floors. The corridor was deserted. From one of the rear offices, I picked up the strains of a country music station. I could hear someone banging on a pipe, but the sound came from deep in the bowels of the building. I moved quickly down the hallway, glancing left into Roger’s office. The lights were on, but he was nowhere to be seen. I heard footsteps approaching. A fellow in coveralls and a baseball cap came around the corner, moving in my direction. He seemed to take my presence for granted, though he took his cap off politely at the sight of me. His hair was a mass of curly gray mashed into a cap-shaped line around his head. “Can I help you with something?”“I’m looking for Roger.”The fellow pointed down. “That’s him you hear whumping on the sample lines.” He was in his fifties, with a wide face, and a dimple in his chin. Nice smile. He reached out a hand and introduced himself. “I’m Delbert Squalls.”“Kinsey Millhone,” I said. “Could you let Roger know I’m here? It’s urgent.”“Sure, no problem. Actually, I’m just on my way down. Whyn’t you follow me?”“Thanks.”Squalls retraced his steps and opened the glass-paneled door into the area I’d seen before: multicolored pipes, a wall of dials and gauges. I could see the gaping hole in the floor. Orange plastic cones had been set across one end, warning the unwary about the dangers of tumbling in.I said, “How many guys you have working tonight?”“Lemme see. Five, counting me. Come on this way. You’re not claustrophobic, I hope.”“Not a bit,” I lied, following him as he crossed to the opening. On my previous visit, I’d seen a moving river of black water down there, silent, smelling of chemicals, looking like nothing I’d ever seen before. Now I could see lights and the bleak walls of concrete, discolored in places where the water had passed. I felt the need to swallow. “Where’d all the water go?” I asked.“We shut the sluice gates, and then we have a couple of big basins it drains into,” he said conversationally. “Takes about four hours. We do this once a year. We got some postaeration sample lines in the process of repair. They’d almost completely corroded. Been clogged for months until this shutdown. We got ten hours to get the work done, and then back she comes.”A series of metal rungs affixed to the wall formed a ladder, leading down into the channel. The banging had stopped. Delbert turned around and edged his foot down into the opening and then proceeded to descend. Tink, tink, tink went the soles of his shoes on the metal rungs as he sank from sight. I moved forward, turning myself. Then I descended as he had to the tunnel below.Once we reached bottom, we were twelve feet underground, standing in the influent channel through which millions of gallons of water had passed. Down here it was always night, and the only moon shone in the form of a two-hundred-watt bulb. The passage smelled damp and earthy. I could see the sluice gate at the dark end of the tunnel, streaks of sediment on the floor. This felt like spelunking, not a passion of mine. I spotted Roger, with his back to us, working on an overhead line. He was standing on a ladder about fifteen feet away, the big lightbulb, in a metal guard, hooked on the pipe near his face. He wore blue coveralls and black rubber hip boots. I could see a denim jacket tucked across the ladder’s brace. It was chilly down here, and I was glad I had my jacket.Roger didn’t turn. “That you, Delbert?” he said over his shoulder.“That’s me. I brought a friend of yours. A Miss... what is it, Kenley?”“It’s Kinsey,” I corrected.Roger turned. The light glittered in his eyes and bleached all the color from his flesh. “Well. I was expecting you,” he said.Delbert had his hands on his hips. “You need some help with that?”“Not really. Why don’t you find Paul and give him a hand?”“Will do.”Delbert started up the ladder again, leaving us alone. His head disappeared, back, hips, legs, boots. It was very quiet. Roger came down from the ladder he was on, wiping his hands on a rag, while I stood there trying to decide how to go about this. I saw him pick up the jacket and check a pocket in front.“This is not what you think,” I said. “Listen, Lorna was getting married the weekend she was murdered. Earlier this week a fellow picked me up in a limo with a couple of flunkies in bulging overcoats...” I felt my voice trail off.He had something in his hand about the size of a walkie-talkie: black plastic housing, a couple of buttons on the front. “You know what this is?”“Looks like a taser gun.”“That’s right.” He pressed a button, and two tiny probes shot out on electrical wires that carried a hundred and twenty thousand volts. The minute the probes touched me I was down, my whole body numb. Couldn’t move. Couldn’t breathe. After a few seconds, my brain started to work. I knew what had happened, I just didn’t know what to do about it. Of all the responses I’d imagined him making, this was not on the list, I lay on my hack like a stone, trying to find a way to heave oxygen into my lungs. None of my extremities responded to cues. In the meantime, Roger patted me down, coming up with my gun, which he tucked in the pocket of his coveralls.I was making a sound, but it probably wasn’t very loud. He moved to the wall and climbed the ladder. I thought he was going to leave me down there. Instead he flipped the trap door so that it came down on the hole. “Thought we might like a little privacy,” he said as he descended. He found a plastic bucket that had been tossed to one side. He turned it upside down and took a seat not that far from me. He leaned close. Mildly he said, “Fuck with me, I’ll smother you with this jacket. Weak as you are, it’s not going to leave any marks.”That’s what he did with Lorna, I thought. Shot her with a stun gun, put a pillow across her face. Wouldn’t have taken long. I felt like a baby in the early stages of development, moving my limbs randomly in an attempt to turn. Grunting, I managed to roll over on my side. I lay there breathing, looking at the wet pavement from the corner of my eye. My cheek rested on something gritty: anthracite, sludge, small shells. I collected myself, inching my right arm up under me. I heard the trap door open, and Delbert Squalls called down, “Roger?”“Yes?”“Guy up here to see you.”“Oh, hell,” he breathed. And then to Delbert, “Tell him I’ll be right there.”I rolled an eye at him, unable to speak, and saw a grimace of impatience cross his face. He got his arms under me and hauled me into a sitting position, propping me against the wall. Like a rag doll, I sat with my legs straight out in front of me, feet tilted together, my shoulders slumped. At least I was breathing. Above me, I could hear someone walking around. I wanted to warn him. I wanted to tell him he was making a terrible mistake. While I made grunting noises, Roger was going up the ladder, his feet going tink, tink, tink, head and shoulders disappearing. I felt tears fill my eyes. My limbs were deadened from the electrical jolt. I tried moving my arms, but the result was the same ineffectual feeling as discovering your extremities “asleep.” I began to flex one fist, trying to get the blood to circulate. My whole body felt oddly anesthetized. I listened, straining, but heard nothing. I struggled and finally managed to topple sideways, turning over on my hands and knees, where I remained, breathing hard, until I could gain my feet. I don’t know how long it took. All was silence above. I reached for the ladder and clung to the closest rung. After a moment, I began my ascent.By the time I climbed out, there was no sign of anyone in the corridor. I forced myself forward. I’d begun to navigate better, but my arms and legs still felt oddly disconnected. I reached his office, where I peered in the door, leaning on the frame. There was no sign of him. My gun had been placed neatly in the center of his blotter. I crossed to the desk and picked it up, tucking it into the small of my back again.I left the office, moving into the reception area. Delbert Squalls was sitting at the desk, leafing through the telephone book, probably ordering pizzas for the night crew. He looked up as I passed.I said, “Where’d Roger go?”“Don’t tell me he left you down there? Man’s got no manners. You just missed him. He took off with that guy in the overcoat. Said he’d be right back. You want to leave him a note?”“I don’t think that’s necessary.”“Oh. Well, suit yourself.” He went back to his search.“Good night, Delbert.”“‘Night. Have a good evening,” he said, reaching for the phone.I emerged from the building into the chill night air. The wind had picked up again, and the sky, though cloudless, bore the fragrance of a distant rain heading in this direction. There was no moon, and the stars looked as though they’d been blown up against the mountains.I went down the stairs to the slot where my car was parked. I let myself into the VW and turned the key in the ignition, pulling out onto the road that led back to town. As I crossed the intersection, I thought I caught sight of a limousine slipping into the dark.
