---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "L Is for Lawless - index_split_005.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - L Is for Lawless"
tags: ["safe", "like", "said", "bucky", "could", "chester", "one", "back", "something", "got", "key", "henry", "birthday", "get", "might", "took", "lewis", "time", "take", "dial", "wheel", "door", "set", "never", "across"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/LIsforLawless-indexsplit005html

---


Unknown
Chapter 4After I left Bucky’s, I came home and took a brief but refreshing nap, which I suspected, even then, was going to be one of the highlights of my vacation. At 4:57 I ran a brush through my hair and trotted down the spiral stairs.The lowering cloud cover was generating an aura of early twilight, and the streetlights winked on as I locked my apartment. Even with the late afternoon drop in temperature, Henry’s back door was open. Raucous laughter spilled through the screen door, along with a tantalizing array of cooking smells. Henry was playing some kind of honky-tonk piano in the living room. I crossed the flagstone patio and knocked on the screen. Preparations for Lewis’s birthday dinner were already under way. For his birthday, I’d bought a sterling-silver shaving set with a mug and a brush that I’d found in an antique store. It was more “collectible” than antique, but I thought it would be something he could either use or admire.Lewis was polishing silverware, but he let me in. He’d taken off his suit coat, but he still wore dress pants, a vest, crisp white shirt with the sleeves rolled up. Charlie had one of Henry’s aprons tied around his waist, and he was in the process of putting the finishing touches on Lewis’s birthday cake. Henry had told me Charlie was becoming self-conscious because his hearing had deteriorated so much. He’d had his hearing officially tested about five years before. At that point, the audiologist had recommended hearing aids, for which Charlie had been fitted. He’d worn them for a week or so and then put them in a drawer. He said the ones he tried felt like someone had a thumb in each ear. Every time he flushed the toilet, it sounded like Niagara Falls. Combing his hair sounded like someone walking on gravel. He didn’t see what was wrong with people talking loud enough for him to hear. Most of the time, he had a hand cupped to his right ear. He said, “What?” quite a lot. The others tended to ignore him.The cake he was working on had listed to one side, and he was using an extra inch of white frosting to prop it up. He glanced up at me. “We don’t let the birthday person bake his own birthday cake,” he said. “Nell does the layers, unless it’s her birthday, of course, and I do boiled frosting, which she never seems to get right.”“Everything smells great.” I lifted the lid to a covered casserole. Inside, there was a mass of something lumpy and white with what looked like pimento, hard-boiled egg, and clumps of pickle relish. “What’s this?”“Say again?”Lewis spoke up. “That started out as potato salad, but Charlie set the timer and never heard it ring, so the potatoes cooked down to mush. We decided to add all the regular ingredients and call it Charlie Pitts’s Famous Mashed Potato Salad. We’re also having fried chicken, baked beans, coleslaw, deviled eggs, and sliced cucumbers and tomatoes with vinegar. I’ve had this same meal every birthday for the last eighty-six years, since I was two,” he said. “We each have something special, and the rule in our family is that the siblings cook. Some are better than others, as it turns out,” he added with a glance at Charlie.I turned to Charlie. “What do you have for your birthday?”“What’s that?”I raised my voice and repeated my question.“Oh. Hot dogs, chili, dill pickles, and potato chips. Mother used to fuss because I refused to have a proper vegetable, but I insisted on potato chips and she finally gave in. Instead of birthday cake, I always ask for a pan of Henry’s brownies, which he usually has to send halfway across the country.”“What about Henry?”Charlie cupped a hand to his ear, and Lewis answered for him. “Country ham, biscuits with red-eye gravy, collard greens, black-eyed peas, and cheese grits. Nell, now she insists on meat loaf, mashed potatoes, green beans, and apple pie with a big wedge of cheddar cheese on top. Never varies.”William came into the kitchen in time to catch Lewis’s last remark. “What doesn’t?”“I was telling Kinsey about our birthday dinners.”I smiled at William. “What’s yours?”Lewis cut in again. “William always begs for a New England boiled dinner, but we vote him down.”“Well, I like it,” he said staunchly.“Oh, you do not. Nobody could like a New England boiled dinner. You just say that because you know the rest of us would be forced to eat it as well.”“So what does he end up with?”“Anything we feel like cooking,” Lewis said with satisfaction.We heard a tap at the back door. I turned and saw that Rosie had arrived. The minute she and William saw each other, their faces lighted up. There were seldom any public displays of affection between them, but there was no doubt about their devotion. He was undismayed by her crankiness, and she took his hypochondria in stride. As a consequence, he complained less about imaginary ailments and her sour moods had diminished.Tonight she was decked out in a dark red muumuu with a purple-and-navy paisley shawl, the rich colors adding a note of drama to her vibrantly dyed red hair. She seemed relaxed. I’d always thought of her as someone abysmally shy, ill at ease with strangers, overbearing with friends. She tended to be quite flirtatious with men, barely tolerant of women, and oblivious of kids. At the same time, she tyrannized the restaurant staff, paying them the lowest wages she could get away with. William and I were forever trying to persuade her to loosen up the purse strings. As for me, she’d bullied me unmercifully since the day I’d moved into the neighborhood. She wasn’t mean, but she was opinionated, and she never seemed to hesitate in making her views known. Since I’d begun eating most of my dinners at the restaurant, she’d routinely told me what to order, ignoring any tastes or requirements of mine. Though I like to think of myself as hard-assed, I’d never had the nerve to stand up to her. My only defense in the face of her dictatorship was passive resistance. So far, I’d refused to get a husband or a dog, two (apparently) interchangeable elements she considered essential for my safety.Now that she was poised on the brink of matrimony, she seemed at peace with herself: playful, full of smiles. William’s siblings had accepted her without a moment’s hesitation... except for Henry, of course, who was dumbfounded when the two connected. I began to see the wedding not so much as a union between her and William, but as an official ceremony by which she’d be initiated into the tribe.From the other room, Henry began to pound out his rendition of “Happy Birthday” to Lewis, which he belted out at top volume. We joined him in a sing-along that continued for an hour before we ate. After dinner, Henry drew me aside.“What’s the story on the break-in?”“I’m not really sure. Chester seems to think there’s some nefarious plot afoot, but I have trouble buying it. Somebody broke in... there’s no doubt about that. I’m just not sure it has anything to do with his dad.”“Chester thinks there’s a link?”“He thinks it’s all connected. I think the guy’s seen too many bad movies. He suspects Johnny was a double agent during World War Two and somehow has this stash of stolen documents in his possession. He feels the VA claim was what alerted the government, and that’s who broke in.”Henry’s look was confused. “Who did?”“The CIA, I guess. Somebody who finally figured out where the old man was hiding. Anyway, that’s his theory, and as they say, he’s stickin’ to it.”“I’m sorry I got you into it. Chester sounds like a nut.”“Don’t worry about it. It’s not like he actually hired me, so what difference does it make?”“Well, it sounds like you did what you could, and I appreciate that. I owe you one.”“Oh, you do not,” I said with a wave of my hand. In the years of our friendship, Henry had done so much for me, I never would catch up.At ten, when they hauled out the Monopoly board and the popcorn paraphernalia, I excused myself and went home. I knew the game would continue until midnight or one, and I wasn’t up to it. Not old enough, I guess.I slept like a stone until 6:14 a.m., when I caught the alarm mere seconds before it was set to ring. I rolled out of bed and pulled on my sweats in preparation for my run. Through the spring and summer months, I run at six, but in winter the sun doesn’t rise until nearly seven. By then I like to be out on the path. I’ve been jogging since I was twenty-five... three miles a day, usually six days a week, barring illness, injury, or an attack of laziness, which doesn’t happen often. My eating patterns are erratic and my diet is appalling, so the run is my way of atoning for my sins. While I’m not crazy about the pain, I’m a sucker for the exhilaration. And I do love the air at that hour of the day. It’s chilly and moist. It smells of ocean and pine and eucalyptus and mown grass. By the time I cool down, walking back to my place, the sun has streaked across the lawns, unrolling all the shadows behind the trees, turning dew to mist. There’s no moment so satisfying as the last moment of a run: chest heaving, heart pounding, sweat pouring down my face. I bend from the waist and bark out a note of pure bliss, relieved of tension, stress, and the residual effects of all the Quarter Pounders with Cheese.I finished my run and did a cool-down walking home. I let myself into the apartment, took a shower, and got dressed. I was just spooning down the last of my cold cereal when the telephone rang. I glanced at the clock. It was 7:41, not an hour at which I would ordinarily expect the world to intrude. I grabbed the phone on the second ring. “Hello?”“Hey, it’s me. Chester. Hope I’m not bothering you,” he said.“This is fine. What are you doing at this hour?”“Was that you I seen running along Cabana a little while ago?”“Yeeees,” I said cautiously. “Is that what you called to ask, or was there something else?”“No, no, not at all. I just wondered,” he said. “I got something I want to show you. We came across it last night.”“What kind of ‘it’?”“Just come over and take a look. It’s something Bucky discovered when he was cleaning out Pappy’s place. I wouldn’t let anyone touch nothing ‘til you saw for yourself. You might have to eat crow.” He sounded nearly gleeful.“Give me five minutes.”I rinsed my dish and my spoon, put the cereal and the milk away, and ran a damp sponge across the kitchen counter. One of the joys of living alone is the only mess you clean up is the one you just made. I tucked my keys in my jacket pocket, pulled the door shut, and took off. In the time since I’d run, the neighborhood was coming alive. I spotted Lewis halfway down the block, taking his morning constitutional. Moza Lowenstein was sweeping off her front porch, and a fellow with a parrot on his shoulder was out walking his dog.This was one of those perfect November days with cool air, high sun, and the lingering smell of wood fires from the night before. Along our block, the palm trees and evergreens provide constants in a landscape that seems to shift subtly with the passing seasons. Even in California we experience a rendition of autumn, a sporadic mix of colors provided by the ginkgo, the sweet gum, the red oak, and white birch. An occasional maple tree might punctuate the foothills with an exclamation point of vibrant red, but the brightest hues are supplied by the blaze of forest fires that sweep through annually. This year the arsonists had struck four times across the state, leaving thousands of acres an ashen gray, as eerie and as barren as the moon.When I got to Bucky’s, I circled the main house and walked up the drive. The crudely patched concrete parking pad was littered with assorted cardboard boxes, and I assumed that progress was being made with Johnny’s personal effects. I headed up the wooden stairs to the apartment above. The door was standing open, and I could hear the murmur of voices. I stepped through the doorway and paused in the entrance. Without the maze of bulky boxes, the space looked smaller and dingier. The furniture remained, but the rooms seemed almost imperceptibly diminished.Bucky and Chester were standing near the closet, which had been emptied of the remaining clothes. Both men were wearing versions of the same short-sleeved nylon Hawaiian shirt: Bucky’s in neon green, Chester’s in hot blue. Nearby, Babe was folding and packing the garments into an old steamer trunk. Coat hangers were piled up to the right of her as each piece of clothing was removed.She was wearing her usual flip-flops, along with shorts and a tank top. I had to admire the comfort with which she occupied her overblown body. I’d have been cold in that outfit, but it didn’t seem to bother her.Chester smiled when he saw me. “Hey, there you are. We were just talking about you. Come over here and take a look at this. See what you think.” Mr. Friendly, I thought.Bucky stepped back, showing me a panel he’d swung away from the back wall of the closet. A small residential safe had been tucked into the space, encased in what appeared to be a block of poured concrete. The safe door was approximately sixteen inches wide and fourteen inches tall. The panel itself appeared to be carefully constructed, a flush-mounted plywood partition with inset hinges. The magnetic latch looked to be spring-loaded and probably released at a touch.“Impressive. How’d you find that?” I asked.Bucky smiled sheepishly, clearly pleased with himself. “We’d emptied the closet and I was sweeping it out when I bumped my broom handle up against the back wall. Sounded funny to me, so I got a flashlight and started looking at it real close, you know, knocking across the wall. Seemed like there was something goofy about this one section, so I give it a push and this panel popped open.”I hunkered down in front of the opening, peering into the cavity that had been hidden in the “found” space between the joists. The front face of the safe was imposing, but that might have been deceptive. Most home safes are not built to withstand a professional burglar with the proper tools and sufficient time to force his way in. The safe I was looking at was more likely a fire safe, in which what appears to be a solid steel wall is only a thin metal outer shell filled with insulating material. The function of such a safe is protection from a home fire of fairly short duration. Insulation in an old safe might be something as basic as natural cement. A more modern safe might rely on vermiculite mica or diatomaceous earth, particles of which can often be traced back from a burglary suspect’s tools and clothing to the specific safe manufacturer.On closer inspection, I could see the safe wasn’t actually embedded in concrete. The concrete formed a sort of housing into which the safe had been shoved.“We got a locksmith on his way,” Chester said. “I couldn’t stand the wait, so I called an emergency number and told ’em to send somebody out. We could have all the answers right behind this dial.” He was probably picturing maps and ciphers, a small wireless radio, a Luger, and transmission schedules written in invisible ink.“Have you looked for the combination? It’s possible he wrote it down and tucked it someplace close. Most people don’t trust their memories, and if he’d needed to get into it, he wouldn’t want to waste time searching.”“We thought of that, but we looked every place we could think of. What about you? You searched pretty good yourself. You come across anything might be the combination to that?”I shrugged. “I never came across any numbers, unless he was using his birthdate or Social Security.”“Can they do that?” Bucky asked. “Make up a combination to suit any set of numbers you give?”I shrugged. “As far as I know. I’m not an expert, but I always assumed you could do that.”“What do you think, should we pull that thing out?” Chester asked.“Couldn’t hurt. The locksmith will probably have to do it anyway once he gets here,” I said.I rose to my feet and stepped out of the closet, allowing Bucky and Chester sufficient room to maneuver the safe from its resting place. It took a fair amount of huffing and puffing before they managed to set it down on the floor in the middle of the room. Once they’d eased the safe out of its concrete housing, we could take a better look. The three of us inspected the exterior surfaces as if this were some mysterious object that had appeared from outer space. The safe was maybe sixteen inches deep, with a two-tone beige-and-gray finish and rubber mounting feet. It didn’t look old. The dial was calibrated with numbers from one to a hundred, which meant you could generate close to a million combinations. There wasn’t any point in trying to guess the right one.Babe had abandoned her packing and was watching the whole procedure. “Maybe it’s open,” she said to no one in particular.We turned in unison and looked at her.“Well, it could be,” she said.“It’s worth a try,” I said. I reached down and pulled the handle without success. I turned the dial a few numbers in one direction and then the other, still pulling the handle, thinking the dial might have been left close to the last digit in the combination. No such luck.“What do we do now?” Bucky asked.“I guess we wait,” I said.Within the hour, the safe technician arrived with a big red metal toolbox. He introduced himself as Bergan Jones from Santa Teresa Locksmiths, shaking hands first with Chester, then with Bucky and me. Babe had gone back to folding clothes, but she nodded at him shyly when he was introduced to her. Jones was tall and bony looking, sandy haired, stoop shouldered, with a high shiny forehead, sandy brows, and big glasses with tortoise-shell frames. I placed him in his middle fifties, but I could have been off five years in either direction.“Hope you can help us out here,” Chester said, waving at the safe, which Jones had already spotted.“No problem. I probably open thirty safes a month. I know this model. Shouldn’t take me long.”The four of us stood and watched in fascination as Jones opened his toolbox. There was something in his manner of an old-fashioned doctor on a house call. He’d made his initial diagnosis, the condition wasn’t fatal, and we all felt relief. Now it was just a matter of the proper treatment. He took out a cone-shaped device that he attached to the dial, screwing it down tightly. Within minutes he’d popped the dial off and set it aside, then removed the two screws holding the dial ring in place, slipped off the ring and set it with the dial. Next he took out an electric drill and began to bore a hole through the metal in the area that had been covered by the dial and ring.“You just drill right through?” Babe said. She sounded disappointed, perhaps hoping for dynamite caps or nitroglycerin.Jones smiled. “I wouldn’t put it quite like that. This is a residential fire safe. If this were a burglary safe, we’d run into hardplate: barrier material just behind this steel plating. I got a pressure bar for that, but it’d still take me thirty minutes to drill a quarter-inch hole. Lot of them have auxiliary spring-loaded relocking devices. You hit the wrong spot and you can fire the relockers. If this happens, it gets a lot worse before it gets better again. This is easy.”We were quiet while he drilled, the low-pitched whine of metal making conversation awkward. The hair on the backs of his hands was a fine gold, his fingers long, wrists narrow. He was smiling to himself, as if he knew something the rest of us hadn’t considered yet. Or maybe he was just a man who enjoyed his work. As soon as a hole had been drilled, he took out another device.“What’s that?” I asked.“Ophthalmoscope,” he said. “Gadget your doctor uses to peer in your eyes. This shines light on the combination wheels so I can see what we got going.” He began to peer into the newly drilled hole, moving closer while flicking an outer dial on the scope to adjust the focal length. While squinting through his ophthalmoscope, he carefully rotated the protruding spindle stub to the left. “This turns the drive wheel, which in turn picks up the third combination wheel. The third wheel moves the second wheel, which then turns the first wheel,” he said. “It takes four rotations to get the first wheel moving. That’s the one closest to the front of the safe. Here it comes. Perfect. The gate’s exactly under the fence. Now we’ll just keep reversing the direction of our rotation and lessening the number of turns. Soon as I get all three wheels lined up, the fence will be in position to drop when the lever nose hits the gate in the drive wheel. We keep turning and the lever pulls back the lock bolt and it’s all over.”With that, he gave the handle a pull and the safe door opened. Chester, Bucky, and I gave out a simultaneous “Ooo” like we were watching fireworks.Babe said, “Heck, it’s empty.”“They must have got it already. Goddamn,” Chester said.“Got what?” Babe said, but he ignored the question, shooting her a cross look.While Bergan Jones wrote down the combination and put his tools away, Bucky peered into the safe, then got down on his back like an auto mechanic and shone a light into the interior. “Something taped up here, Dad.”I leaned over and peered with him. An item had been secured to the top of the safe: a lumpy-looking ten-inch-by-ten-inch square of beige tape.Chester stepped over Bucky’s legs and crouched by the safe, squinting at the patch. “What is that? Peel it off and give it here. Let me take a look at that thing.”Gingerly Bucky loosened one corner, then pulled it away like a Band-Aid from a wound. A big iron key adhered to the tape. It appeared to be an old-fashioned iron skeleton key with simple cuts in the end. He held it up. “Anybody recognize this?”“Beats me,” I said, and then turned to Chester. “You know what it is?”“Nope, but Pappy used to fool around with locks now I think of it. He got a kick out of it. He liked to take a lock out of a door and file a key to fit.”“I never saw him do that,” Bucky said.“This is when I was a kid. He worked for a locksmith during the Depression. I remember him telling me what a hoot it was. He had this collection of old locks — probably close to a hundred of them — but I haven’t seen them for years.”I turned the key over in my hand. The design was ornate, the handle scalloped, with a hole in the other end like a skate key. Viewed straight on, the bit was shaped almost like a question mark. “The lock and keyhole would be odd looking, to say the least. You don’t remember anything like it around here?”Chester’s mouth pulled down. “Not me. What about you guys? You know the place better than I do at this point.”Bucky shook his head, and Babe gave a little shrug.I held the key out to Bergan Jones. “Any ideas?”Jones smiled slightly, snapping down the locks on his toolbox. “Looks like a gate key. One of those big old iron jobs like they have on estates.” He turned to Chester. “You want me to bill you on this?”“I’ll write you a check. Come on down to the kitchen and we’ll take care of it. You probably gathered by now my pappy died a few months back. We’re still trying to get his affairs sorted out. The safe came as a surprise. People ought to leave instructions. What the hell this is and who’s supposed to get that. Anyways, we do appreciate your help.”“That’s what I’m in business to do.”The two men departed, leaving Bucky, Babe, and me to contemplate the key. Bucky said, “Now what?”“I have a friend who knows a lot about locks,” I said. “He might have a suggestion about what kind of lock this might fit.”“Might as well. Won’t do us any good otherwise.”Babe took the key and inspected it, frowning. “Maybe Pappy kept it because he liked the way it looked,” she said. “It’s neat. It’s old-timey.” She handed it to Bucky, who passed it back to me.“Yeah, but why bother to keep it in a fireproof safe? He could have stuck it in a drawer. He could have wore it on a chain around his neck,” he said.“If you don’t object, I’ll see what my local expert has to say.”“Fine with me,” Bucky said.I slipped the key in my jeans pocket without mentioning the fact that my local expert was the burglar who’d also given me the set of key picks I carry in my handbag.Walking back to my place, I found myself reviewing the entire sequence of events. I have to confess the past twenty-four hours had piqued my curiosity. It wasn’t necessarily Chester’s spy theory, which still seemed farfetched. What bothered me were the vague, unanswered questions surfacing in the old man’s life. I like order and tidiness; no clutter and no dust bunnies hidden under the bed.As soon as I got home, I sat down at my desk, pulled out a pack of index cards, and started making notes. It was amazing how many details I could actually recall once I began committing them to paper. When I’d exhausted the subject, I pinned the cards up on the corkboard that hangs above my desk. I put my feet up on the desk and leaned back in my swivel chair with my hands locked behind my head and studied the whole collection. Something wasn’t right, but I couldn’t figure out what it was. I shifted some cards around and pinned them up in a new configuration. It was something I’d read. Burma. Something about Chennault and the American Volunteer Group. For the moment the truth eluded me, but I knew it was there. I thought about nailing down the unit he’d served in. Was that really the issue here, or was there something else at stake? In scanning Johnny’s books, I’d seen several AVG fighter pilots mentioned by name. One or more of those guys had to be alive today. Couldn’t they provide a way to pinpoint Johnny’s fighter group? It’d be a pain in the ass, and I sure wasn’t going to do it, but I could at least steer Chester in the right direction. I’d have to check back through the books and see if I could find the reference, but what the hell, I wasn’t doing anything else. Besides, once I start worrying a knot, I can’t let go of it.I put in a call to my burglar friend, whose number had been disconnected. Rats. Later in the morning I’d try the Santa Teresa Police Department. Detective Halpern in Major Crimes would probably know where he was.
