---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "L Is for Lawless - index_split_021.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - L Is for Lawless"
tags: ["ray", "gilbert", "said", "laura", "back", "could", "helen", "u", "looked", "hand", "one", "seemed", "get", "see", "got", "took", "money", "eye", "right", "old", "would", "guy", "stone", "first", "face"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/LIsforLawless-indexsplit021html

---


Unknown
Chapter 20Gilbert and Laura arrived within the hour with the canvas duffel in tow, probably packed with the eight thousand dollars in cash. Gilbert was wearing his Stetson again, perhaps hoping to enhance his tough-guy image now that he’d been bested by an eighty-five-year-old blind woman. Laura was clearly exhausted. Her skin looked bleached, residual bruises casting pale green-and-yellow shadows along her jaw. Against the pallor of her complexion, her dark auburn hair seemed harsh and artificial, too stark a contrast to the drained look of her cheeks. I could see now that her eyes were the same hazel as Ray’s, the dimple in her chin a match for his. Her clothes looked slept in. She was back in the outfit I’d first seen her wearing: oversize pale blue denim dress with short sleeves, a long-sleeved white T-shirt worn under it, red-and-white-striped tights, and high-topped red tennis shoes. The belly harness was gone and the effect was odd, as if she’d suddenly dropped weight in the wake of some devastating illness. Gilbert seemed tense. His face was still pock-marked with spots where Helen’s birdshot had nicked him, and he wore a piece of adhesive tape across his earlobe. Aside from the evidence of first aid, his blue jeans looked pressed, his boots polished. He wore a clean white western-cut shirt with a leather vest and a bolo tie. The outfit was an affectation, as I guessed he’d been west of the Mississippi only once and that not much more than a week ago. At the sight of her grandmother, Laura started to cross the room, but Gilbert snapped his fingers and, like a dog, she heeled. He put his left hand on the back of her neck and murmured something in her ear. Laura looked miserable but offered no resistance. Gilbert’s attention was diverted by the sight of his gun in the waistband of Ray’s pants. “Hey, Ray. You want to give that back?”“I want the keys first,” Ray said.“Let’s don’t get into any bullshit argument,” Gilbert said.His right hand came up to Laura’s throat, and with a flick, the blade jutted out of the knife he’d palmed. The point pierced her skin, and the gasp she emitted was filled with surprise and pain. “Daddy?”Ray saw the trickle of blood and the absolute stillness with which she stood. He glanced down at his waistband where the Colt was tucked. He took the gun out and held it toward Gilbert, butt first. “Here. Take the fuckin’ thing. Get the blade off her neck.”Gilbert studied him, easing the point back almost imperceptibly. Laura didn’t move. I could see the blood begin to saturate the neck of her T-shirt. Tears trickled down her cheeks.Ray motioned impatiently. “Come on, take the gun. Just get the knife away from her throat.”Gilbert pressed a button on the knife handle, retracting the blade. Laura put her hand against the wound and looked at her bloody fingertips. She moved to a kitchen chair and sat down, her face drained of any remaining color. Gilbert switched the knife to his left hand and reached over to take the gun with his right. He checked the magazine, which was fully loaded, and then tucked the gun in his waistband, hammer cocked and safety on. He seemed to relax once the gun was back in his possession. “We gotta trust each other, right? Soon as I have my share of the money, she goes with you and we’re done.”“That’s the deal,” Ray said. It was clear he was fuming, a response not lost on Gilbert.“Bygones be bygones. We can shake on it,” Gilbert said. He held his hand out.Ray looked at it briefly, and then the two shook hands. “Let’s get on with this, and no funny business.”Gilbert’s smile was bland. “I don’t need funny business as long as I have her.”Laura had watched the exchange with a mixture of horror and disbelief. “What are you doing? Why’d you give him the gun?” she said to Ray. “You really think he’ll keep his word?”Gilbert’s expression never changed. “Stay out of this, babe.”Her tone was tinged with outrage, her eyes filled with betrayal. “He’s not going to split the money. Are you crazy? Just tell him where it is and let’s get out of here before he kills me.”“Hey!” Ray said. “This is business, okay? I spent forty years in the joint for this money, and I’m not backing off because you got problems with the guy. Where were you all these years? I know where I was. Where were you? You come along expecting me to bail you out. Well, I’m bailing, okay? So why don’t you back off and let me do it my way.”“Daddy, help me. You have to help.”“I am. I’m buying your life, and it don’t come cheap. My deal is with him, so butt out of this.”Laura’s face took on a stony cast and she stared down at the ground, her jaw set. Gilbert seemed to enjoy the fact that she’d been rebuffed. He moved as if to touch her, but she batted his hand away. Gilbert smiled to himself and sent a wink in my direction. I didn’t trust any of them, and it was making my stomach hurt.I looked on while Ray laid out the game plan, filling Gilbert in on the calls we’d made and the reasoning behind them. I noticed he’d left out a few pertinent facts, like the name of the cemetery and the name on the monument. “We haven’t found the money yet, but we’re getting close. You expect to benefit, you might as well pitch in here and help,” Ray said, his eyes dead with loathing. A chilly smile passed between them, full of promises. I looked from one to the other, hoping fervently I wouldn’t be around if the two of them ever got into a pissing contest.Ray said, “I assume you got the keys with you.”Gilbert pulled them from his pocket, displayed them briefly, hooked together on a ring, and then tucked them away again.Without another word, Ray began to gather up some of the equipment he’d assembled: the rope, the two shovels, the bolt cutters. “Everybody grab something and let’s go,” he said. “We can stick all this stuff in the trunk.”Gilbert picked up the hand drill, taking his time about it so it wouldn’t look like he was obeying orders. “One more thing. I want the old lady with us.”“I’m not going anywhere with you, bub,” Helen snapped. She sat down in her chair and leaned stubbornly on her bat.Ray paused. “What’s she got to do with it?”“We leave anyone behind, how do I know they aren’t dialing the old 911?” Gilbert said to Ray, ignoring the old woman.Ray said, “Come on. She wouldn’t do that.”“Oh, yes I would,” she said promptly.Gilbert stared at Ray. “You see that? Old woman’s crazy as a bed bug. She goes, too, or it’s all off.”“What are you talking about? That’s bullshit. You gonna forfeit the dough?”Gilbert smiled, still gripping Laura’s neck. He gave her head a shake. “I don’t have to forfeit anything. You’re the one going to lose.”Ray closed his eyes and then opened them. “Jesus. Get your coat, Ma. You’re coming with us. I’m sorry to have to do this.”Helen’s gaze moved vaguely from Gilbert to Ray. “It’s all right, son. I’ll go if you insist.”Since Gilbert didn’t trust any of us, we took one car. Gilbert, Helen, and Laura sat together in the backseat, the old woman holding hands with her granddaughter. Helen still had her bat, which Gilbert took note of. Sensing his gaze, Helen shook the bat in his direction. “I’m not done with you, mama,” Gilbert murmured.Ray drove while I navigated from the front seat, tracing the route on the open map. He headed east on Portland Avenue, cutting back onto Market Street and from there under the bridge and up onto 71 heading north. The day was breezy, faintly warmer than it had been. The sky was a wide expanse of robin’s egg blue, clouding up along the horizon. I was hoping Ray would violate some minor traffic law and get us stopped by the highway patrol, but he kept the speedometer exactly at the limit, giving hand signals I hadn’t seen anyone use for years.About a mile beyond the Watterson Expressway, he moved onto the Gene Snyder Freeway and took the first off-ramp. We exited onto 22, which we followed for some distance. The route we took was probably once a little-used dirt road, many miles out in the country. I pictured merchants and farmers in a countywide radius, traveling hours by wagon to reach the wooded area where their dead would be laid to rest. The Twelve Fountains Memorial Park was located several miles across the line into Oldham County, surrounded by limestone walls, occupying land that had once been part of a five-hundred-acre tract of woods and tangled undergrowth. Over the years, the hilly countryside had been tamed and manicured.At the entrance, iron gates stood open, flanked by fieldstone gateposts that must have been fifteen feet tall. The road split left and right, circling an arrangement of three large stone fountains, shooting staggered columns and sprays of water into the icy November air. A discreet sign directed us to the right, where a small stone building was tucked against a backdrop of cypress and weeping willows. Ray pulled onto the gravel parking pad. I could see the woman in the office peering out at us.Gilbert took Helen into the office with him. Laura’s face was still so visibly bruised as to generate attention he didn’t want. His own face was still peppered with tiny cuts, but nobody’d have the nerve to ask what happened.While the two of them were gone, Laura caught Ray’s eye in the rearview mirror. “What about her?” she said, indicating me.“What about her?” Ray said, annoyed.“Gilbert’s worried about Grammy calling the cops. What makes you think she won’t?”I turned around in the seat to face her. “I’m not calling anyone. I’m just trying to get home,” I said.Laura ignored me. “You think she’s going to sit by and watch us walk away with the money?”“We haven’t even found it yet,” Ray said.“But when we do, then what?”Ray’s expression was despairing. “Jesus, Laura. What do you want from me?”“She’s going to be trouble.”“I am not!”Laura looked away from me and out the window, her mouth set. Gilbert and Helen were returning to the car. He ushered her unceremoniously into the backseat again and then got in on his side. Helen muttered something scathing and Ray said, “Ma, be careful.” She reached forward and touched Ray’s shoulder with affection.Gilbert got in the car, slamming his door shut, handing me the pamphlet he carried with him. Since I’d called in advance, the woman in the sales office had provided us with a brochure detailing the charter and development of the memorial park. The pamphlet opened up to show a map of the cemetery with points of interest marked with an X. She’d also supplied a folded sheet of paper that showed a detailed plot map of the particular section we’d be visiting. The Pelissaro gravesite she’d circled in red.I looked back at Gilbert. “You know, this may not lead to anything,” I said.“I hope you have a backup plan, in that case.”My backup plan was to run away real fast.Ray fired up the engine again. I showed him the route, which the woman had marked in ballpoint pen. The cemetery was laid out in a series of interconnecting circles that from the air would have resembled the wedding ring design on a patchwork quilt. Roads encompassed each section, curving into one another like a succession of roundabouts. We took the first winding road to the left as far as the Three Maidens fountain. At the fork, we veered left, moving up past the lake, and then to the right and around to the old section of the park. The cemetery had been named for its twelve fountains, which loomed unexpectedly, wanton displays of water spewing skyward. In California, the waste of water would be subject to citation, especially in the drought years, which seemed to outnumber the rainy ones.We passed the Soldier’s Field, where the military dead were buried, their uniform white markers as neatly lined up as a newly planted orchard. The perspective shifted with us, the vanishing point sweeping across the rows of white crosses like the beam from a lighthouse. In the older sections of the cemetery, into which we drove, the mausoleums were impressive: limestone-and-granite structures complete with sloping cornices and Ionic pilasters. The larger sarcophagi were adorned with kneeling children, their heads bowed, stone lambs, urns, stone draperies, and Corinthian columns. There were pyramids, spires, and slender women in contemplative postures, cast-bronze dogs, arches, pillars, sculpted busts of stern-looking gents, and elaborate stone vases, all interspersed with inlaid granite tablets and simple headstones of more modest dimensions. We passed grave after grave, stretching away as far as the eye could see. The headstones represented so many family relationships, the endings to so many stories. The very air felt dark and the ground was saturated with sorrow. Every stone seemed to say, This is a life that mattered, this marks the passing of someone we loved and will miss deeply and forever. Even the mourners were dead now and the mourners who mourned them.The Pelissaro plot was located in a cul-de-sac. We parked and got out. Gilbert tossed his Stetson in the backseat, and the five of us moved toward the gravesite in ragtag fashion. I held the photograph at eye level, marveling at the scene that was laid out before us exactly as it looked forty years before. The Pelissaro monument, a white marble obelisk, towered over the surrounding graves. Most of the trees in the photograph were still standing, many having grown much larger with the passage of time. As in the picture, the branches were once again barren of leaves, but this time there was no snow and the grass had gone dormant, a patchy brown mixed with dull green. I spotted the same cluster of headstones enclosed with iron fencing, the section of stone wall to the right of us.Gilbert was already impatient. “What do we do now?” he asked Ray.Ray and I exchanged a brief look. So far, Gilbert had honored his end of the bargain. He’d showed up with Laura, who was not only alive and well, but looked as if she hadn’t been battered the night before. Ray and I stood there, stalling, knowing we really didn’t have a way to hold up our end. We’d tried to indicate the limits to our understanding, but Gilbert didn’t have any tolerance for ambiguity. Helen waited patiently, bundled up in her coat, attentive to a large monument she probably mistook for one of us.Gilbert said, “I’m not going to dig up any monuments. Especially this one. Probably weighs a couple tons.”“Gimme a minute,” Ray said. He surveyed the scene in front of us, his gaze taking in headstones, landscape features, valleys, trees, the ring of hills beyond. I knew what he was doing because I was doing the same thing, searching for the next move in the peculiar board game we were playing. I’d half expected a water tower looming in the distance, some pivotal word painted on its circumference. I’d hoped to see an old gardener’s shed or a signpost, anything to indicate where to go from here. The Pelissaro gravesite had to be important, or why bother to send the photograph? The keys might or might not be relevant, but the monument foreshadowed something, if we could just figure out what.I could see Ray doing a spot check of names on every marker within range. None of them seemed significant. I did a three-hundred-and-sixty-degree turn, scanning the cul-de-sac behind us, which was ringed by mausoleums. “I got it,” I said. I put a hand on Ray’s arm and pointed.There were five mausoleums in the circle, gray limestone structures sunk into the rising hill that fanned up and around the cul-de-sac like an upturned shirt collar. Each of the five facades was different. One resembled a miniature cathedral, another a scaled-down version of the Parthenon. Two looked like small bank buildings complete with colonnades and shallow steps leading up to once impressive entrances now sealed shut with blank concrete. On each, the family name was carved above the door in stone. REXROTH. BARTON. HARTFORD. WILLIAMSON. It was the fifth mausoleum that caught my attention. The name above the door was LAWLESS.Ray snapped his fingers rapidly. “Gimme the keys,” he said to Gilbert, who obliged without argument.We scrambled down to the road, all of us intent on the sight of the mausoleum. The entrance was protected by an iron gate, with a keyhole visible even from a distance. Through the bars of the gate, a chain had been added, circling the main lock and secured with a padlock. I glanced down at the piece of paper that showed, in detail, the layout of burial plots in the area. The Lawless mausoleum was located in section M, lot 550. The message from Johnny Lee had been sent and received. I couldn’t believe we’d done it, but we’d actually managed to interpret his missive.Ray moved to the car, which we’d parked in the circle just across from the mausoleum. He opened the trunk and took out a tire iron. “Grab a tool,” he said. Again, Gilbert obeyed without a murmur, arming himself with a shovel. Laura grabbed a hammer and a pickax Ray had found and tossed in the back at the last minute. The five of us crossed the pavement, Helen bringing up the rear with her bat tapping the pavement. We moved up the steps in an irregular grouping and peered through the iron bars of the gate. Inside, there was a paved foyer, maybe ten feet wide and five feet deep. On the back wall, there were spaces for sixteen vaults into which individual caskets could be placed, the vaults themselves arranged four rows high and four rows wide.We stood back and watched as Ray inserted the small key in the Master padlock, which popped loose at a turn. The chain, once freed, clattered to the pavement. The big iron key turned in the gate lock with effort. The gate shrieked as it swung open, the shrill scraping sound of metal on metal. We went in. Of the sixteen burial slots, all seemed to be filled. Twelve bore engraved stones indicating the name of the deceased, birth and death dates, and sometimes a line of poetry. All of the birth and death dates ranged in years before the turn of the century. The four remaining slots were cemented over with plain concrete and bore no data at all.Ray seemed reluctant to act at first. This was, after all, a family burial place. “I guess we better get a move on,” he said. Tentatively, he went after the uppermost square of concrete with the tire iron. After the first blow, he began to hack in earnest at the blank face, working with concentration. Gilbert took one of the shovels and used the blade in much the same way, laboring beside Ray. The noise seemed remarkably loud to me, echoing around in the confines of the mausoleum. I’m not sure anyone outside the structure could have heard much. It certainly wouldn’t be easy to pinpoint the source of all the pounding. The concrete was apparently only the barest of shells because the facing began to crack, yielding to sheer force. Once Ray had succeeded in breaking through, Gilbert chipped away at the crumbling material and widened the opening.Meanwhile, Laura was on her knees, whacking with equal vigor at the concrete facing on the bottom vault with the pickax. Dust flew up, filling the air with a pale gritty cloud of small particles. There was something disturbing about the diligence with which they worked. All their conflicts and past quarrels had been set aside with the acceleration of the hunt. Discovery was imminent and greed had displaced their contentiousness.Helen and I moved back against the wall, getting out of their way. Through the barred gate, looking toward the hillside, I could see the wind pushing at the tree branches. I craned my neck, looking up with uneasiness. The sky had clouded over completely, dark forms massing above us. The weather here was changeable, where in California it seemed fixed and monotonous. I couldn’t imagine where this situation was heading, and I was torn between dread and some dim hope that in the end everything would turn out all right. Ray and Gilbert would split the money, shake hands, and go about their business, freeing me to go about mine. Laura would leave Gilbert. Maybe she’d spend some time with her father and her grandmother before the three parted company. Ray would probably remain with his mother while she had her eye surgery, unless he was caught and sent back to prison first.I checked my watch. It was only 10:15 in the morning. If I managed to catch an early afternoon flight, I might get home in time for dinner. I’d missed most of the prewedding festivities. Tomorrow night, Wednesday, the night before the wedding, William and “the boys” had elected to go bowling, while Nell, Klotilde, and I would probably have supper up at Rosie’s. She swore there was no need for a rehearsal dinner. “So what’s to rehearse? We’re going to stand side by side and repeat what the judge tells us.” Nell hadn’t had a chance to do the final adjustments on my bridesmaid’s muumuu, but how much fitting could it need?The pounding in the mausoleum took on a repetitious rhythm. I could hear a groundsman using a leaf blower somewhere in the distance. No cars passed along the road that rimmed us. The next thing I knew, Ray, Gilbert, and Laura were dragging canvas bags out of the building and down the steps. Helen and I followed, standing by while Ray upended one of the sacks and toppled the contents out onto the asphalt. Ray was saying, “The guy’s a genius. Who the hell would have thought of this? I wish he were here. I wish he could have seen this. Look at that. Jesus, is that beautiful?”What had tumbled onto the pavement was a hodgepodge of U.S. and foreign currency, jewelry, silver flatware and hollowware, stock certificates, coin silver, Confederate notes, bearer bonds, unidentified legal documents, coins, proof sets, stamps, and gold and silver dollars. The hillock of valuables was nearly as high as my knee, and six other canvas sacks were as crammed full as this had been. Even Helen, with her poor eyes, seemed to sense the enormity of the find. A rain spot appeared on the pavement nearby, followed by a second and a third, at wide intervals. Ray looked up with surprise, holding a hand out. “Let’s get going,” he said.Laura refilled the one sack while Ray and Gilbert dragged the others to the trunk of the car and hoisted them in. When the last sack had been added, Ray slammed the trunk down. We were all in the process of getting into the car when I caught sight of Gilbert. For a moment, I thought he was pausing to tuck his shirt in, but I realized what he was reaching for was the gun. Ray saw my face and glanced back at Gilbert, who stood now, feet planted, the Colt in his hand. Laura gripped Helen’s arm, the two of them immobilized. I saw Laura lean down and murmur something to her grandmother, warning her what was happening since the old woman couldn’t see that well.Gilbert was watching Ray with amusement, as if the rest of us weren’t present. “I hate to tell you this, Ray babe, but your pal Johnny was a stone killer.”Ray stared at him. “Really.”“He put out a contract on Darrell McDermid and had him offed.”Ray seemed to frown. “I thought Darrell died in an accident.”“It wasn’t an accident. The kid was smoked. Johnny paid a guy big money to make sure Darrell went down.”“Why? Because he ratted us out to the cops?”“That’s what Johnny said.”“So who did him?”“Me. Kid was all tore up about his brother anyway, so I put him out of his misery.”Ray thought about it briefly and then shrugged. “So? I can live with that. Served him right. The fuck deserved what he got.”“Yeah, except Darrell wasn’t guilty. Darrell never did a thing. Someone told Johnny a big fat fib,” Gilbert said with mock regret. “It was me told the cops. I can’t believe you guys never figured that out.”“You were the snitch?”“I’m afraid so,” he said. “I mean, let’s face it. I’m a rat-fuck. I’m worthless. It’s like that old joke about the guy saves a snake and then gets bit to death. He’s all, ‘Hey, why’d you do that when I saved your life?’ And the snake goes, ‘Listen, buddy, you knew I was a viper the first time you picked me up.’”“Gilbert, I gotta tell you. I never mistook you for a nice guy. Not once.” Casually Ray reached back, and when his hand came into view again, he was holding a Smith & Wesson. 38 Special.Gilbert laughed. “Fuck. A shoot-out. This should be fun.”“More for me than for you,” Ray said. His eyes glittered with malice, but Gilbert only seemed amused, as if he didn’t consider Ray a threat he had to take seriously.“Daddy, don’t,” Laura said.I said, “Come on, guys. You don’t have to do this. There’s plenty of money....”“This isn’t about the money,” Ray said. He wasn’t looking at me. He was looking straight at Gilbert, the two of them standing no more than ten feet apart. “This is about a guy abusing my daughter, beating up my ex-wife. This is about Darrell and Farley, you asshole. Do we understand one another?”“Absolutely,” Gilbert said.I felt myself backing up a step, so intent on the two men, I didn’t see what Helen was doing. She brought up the baseball bat, flailing wildly in Gilbert’s general direction, bashing Ray’s arm on the back swing. She missed Gilbert altogether and nearly whacked me in the mouth. I could feel the wind against my lips as the bat whistled past. She hit the car on her follow-through, and the impact knocked the bat right out of her hand.“Jesus, Ma! Get out of here. Get her outta here!”Laura screamed and ducked. I hit the ground, looking up in time to see Gilbert take aim and fire at her. There was a click. He looked down at the Colt in astonishment. He recocked and pulled the trigger; the hammer clicked again. He pulled the slide back, ejecting a round, then let it slam forward again, popping another round into the chamber. He swung the gun around and aimed at Ray. He pulled the trigger. Click. He recocked and pulled the trigger again. Click. “What the fuck?” he said.Ray smiled. “Well, shame on me. I forgot to mention I shortened the firing pin.”Ray fired and Gilbert went down with an odd sound, as if the wind had been knocked out of him. Ray moved forward easily until he was standing directly over Gilbert. He fired again.Spellbound, I stared as he fired again.Ray turned and looked in my direction. He said, “Don’t do that.”Out of the corner of my eye, I caught a blur of motion and then I heard the crack of the baseball bat coming down on my head. In the split second before the dark descended, I flashed on Helen with regret. Her erratic batting practice had come to an abrupt halt and she’d popped me a good one. The only problem was I could see her and her hands were empty. Laura was the one up at bat and I was gone, gone, gone.I spent the night in a semiprivate room at a hospital called Baptist Hast with the worst headache I believe I’ve ever had in my life. Because of the concussion, the doctor wouldn’t give me any pain medication and my vital signs were checked every thirty minutes or so. Since I wasn’t permitted to sleep, I spent a tedious couple of hours being interrogated by two detectives from the Oldham County Sheriff’s Department. The guys were nice enough, but they were naturally skeptical of the story I told. Even mildly concussed, I was lying through my teeth, cleaning up my culpability in events as I sketched them out. Finally, a call was placed to the Courier-Journal and some poorly paid reporter checked through the back files to find an account of the bank robbery, including names of all the suspects and a lot of colorful speculation about the missing money. As it turned out, of course, the money was still missing, as were Ray Rawson, his aged mother, and his daughter, Laura, whose common-law husband was laid out in the morgue, his body perforated with bullet holes.I maintained stoutly that I’d been forced along at gunpoint, clobbered and abandoned when my usefulness ran out. Who was there to contradict me? It helped that when a call was placed to Lieutenant Dolan back in Santa Teresa, he spoke up in my behalf and defended my somewhat sullied honor. The investigating officer laboriously handprinted my account of events, and I agreed to be available for testimony when (and if) Ray Rawson and his merry band were arrested and tried. I don’t think the chances are all that good myself. For one thing, Ray has all that money in his possession, along with the forty years’ worth of contacts and criminal cunning he picked up while he was in prison. I’m relatively certain he’s managed to acquire three sets of false identification, including passports, and first-class tickets to parts unknown.Wednesday morning, when I was released, a nurse just getting off duty offered me a ride as far as the Portland neighborhood where Helen Rawson lived. I got out at the corner and walked the remaining half block. The house was dark. The back door was standing open and I could see where miscellaneous items of clothing had been dropped in the haste of their departure. I went into the bedroom and turned on the table lamp. All the old lady’s pills were gone, a sure sign she’d decamped with her son and granddaughter. I took the liberty of using her telephone, not even bothering to charge the call to my credit card. I had a dreadful time getting through to anyone. I tried Henry and got his machine again. Was the guy never home? I tried Rosie’s and got no answer. I called my friend Vera, who must have gone off with her doctor-husband for the long Thanksgiving weekend. I called my old friend Jonah Robb. No answer. I even tried Darcy Pascoe, the receptionist at the company where I once worked. I was out of luck and beginning to panic, trying to figure out who in the world could help me out in a pinch. Finally, in desperation, I called the only person I could think of. The line rang four times before she picked up. I said, “Hello, Tasha? This is your cousin Kinsey. Remember you said to call if I ever needed anything?”
