---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "L Is for Lawless - index_split_009.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - L Is for Lawless"
tags: ["door", "room", "could", "one", "uniform", "hotel", "two", "service", "get", "desk", "would", "corridor", "security", "name", "made", "much", "like", "back", "said", "well", "big", "minute", "right", "floor", "tray"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/LIsforLawless-indexsplit009html

---


Unknown
Chapter 8I went down to the lobby. I cruised the area, trying to get a feel for the place. By day, the red velvet and gilt had all the drab ambiance of an empty movie theater. A white guy in a red uniform pushed a whining vacuum cleaner back and forth across the carpeting. The night clerk was gone and the reception desk was personed by a corps of wholesome-looking navy-suited youths. No one on duty was going to give me any help. Any odd request would be referred to the shift supervisor, the assistant manager, or the manager, all of whom would regard me with the sort of skepticism I deserved. In my quest for information, I was going to have to use ingenuity, which is to say the usual lies and deceit.Most hotel guests tend to see a facility in terms of their own needs: the concierge’s desk, restaurants, the gift shop, rest rooms, public telephones, the bell stand, conference halls, and meeting rooms. In my initial foray, I was looking for the executive offices. I skirted the perimeter and finally pushed through a glass door into a lushly carpeted corridor defined by pale wood paneling and indirect lighting. The offices of various department heads were identified in gleaming brass letters.In this part of the hotel, there was no attempt to carry out either the medieval or the buckaroo conceit. Since this was a Saturday, the glass-fronted offices of the sales manager and the director of security were dark and the doors locked. Hours of operation were neatly lettered in gold, making it clear I would have free rein until Monday morning at nine. I assumed there were security guards on duty twenty-four hours a day, but I hadn’t seen one yet. The sales manager’s name was Jillian Brace. The director of security was Burnham J. Pauley. I made a note to myself and continued my swing through the administrative quarters and out a door at the far end of the empty hallway.I returned to the front desk and waited until one of the desk clerks was free. The kid who approached me was in his mid-twenties: cleanshaven, clear complected, blue eyed, and slightly overweight. According to his name tag, he was Todd Luckenbill. Mr. and Mrs. Luckenbill had made sure his teeth were straight, his manners were impeccable, and his posture was good. No earrings, no jewels in his nose, and no visible tattoos. He said, “Yes, ma’am. May I help you?”“Well, I hope so, Todd,” I said. “I’m passing through Dallas briefly on a family matter, but it happens my boss has been looking for a hotel where we can book a big sales conference next spring. I thought I might recommend this place, but I wasn’t sure what sort of group package you offered. I wonder if you could direct me to the sales manager. Is he here today?”Todd smiled, his tone slightly chiding. “Actually, it’s not a ‘he.’ Jillian Brace is our sales manager, but she doesn’t work on weekends. You might try her Monday morning. She’s usually here by nine and I’m sure she’d be happy to talk to you.”“Gee, I’d love to do that, but I have a flight out at six. Do you think you could get me her business card? I can always give her a call when I get back to Chicago.”“Sure. If you can wait just a minute, I’ll bring you one.”“Thanks. Oh, and one more thing while I’m thinking about it. My boss is concerned about conference security. We had a little problem with one of the big hotels last year, and I know he’s reluctant to schedule anything until he’s confident about security procedures.”“What kind of business are you in?”“Investment banking. Very high level stuff.”“You have to talk to Mr. Pauley about that. He’s the director of security. You want me to get you his card, too?”“Sure, that’d be great. I’d really appreciate it, if it’s not too much trouble.”“No problem.”While he was off on his mission, I picked up a couple of postcards from a counter display. The glossy photograph on the front showed the claret red lobby with two heralds in livery tooting on horns much longer than their arms. I checked, but they didn’t seem to be on the premises this morning. Todd returned moments later with a fistful of the promised business cards. I thanked him and crossed the lobby to an alcove furnished with a mahogany table and two velvet-covered banquettes.I found some hotel stationery in the drawer and made a few notes. Then I took a deep breath, picked up one of the house phones, and asked the hotel operator to connect me with Laura Huckaby. There was a pause, and then the operator said, “I’m sorry, but I don’t show a registration for anyone by that name.”“You don’t? Well, that’s odd. Oh, yeah. Wait a minute. Try Hudson.”The operator made no response, but she was apparently putting me through to a guest by that name. I hoped it was the right one. I made a note of the name and circled it so I wouldn’t forget.A woman answered after one ring, sounding anxious and out of sorts. “Farley?”Farley? What kind of name was that? I wondered if he was the guy she’d left at the airport back in Santa Teresa.“Ms. Hudson? This is Sara Fullerton, Jillian Brace’s assistant down in Sales and Marketing? How are you today?” I used that false, warm tone all telephone solicitors are taught in telephone soliciting school.“Fine,” Laura said cautiously, waiting for the punch line.“Well, that’s good. I’m glad to hear that. Ms. Hudson, we’re conducting a confidential survey of certain select guests, and I wonder if I might ask you a few questions. I promise this won’t take more than two minutes of your time. Can you spare us that?”Laura didn’t seem interested, but she didn’t want to be rude about it. “All right, but please be quick. I’m waiting for a call, and I don’t want the line tied up.”My heart began to pound. If this was not the right guest, the truth would soon surface. “I understand, and we appreciate your help. Now, according to our supplemental registration records, we show that you arrived last night from Santa Teresa, California, on American Airlines flight 508, is that correct?”There was a silence.“Excuse me, Ms. Hudson. Is that correct?”Her tone was wary. “Yes.”“And your arrival time was approximately one forty-five a.m.?”“That’s right.”“Did you have any difficulty reaching the hotel shuttle service when you called from baggage claim?”“No. I just picked up the phone and dialed.”“Was the shuttle service prompt?”“I guess. It took about fifteen minutes, but that seemed okay.”“I see. Was the driver courteous and helpful?”“He was fine.”“How would you rate the check-in procedure? Excellent, very good, adequate, or poor?”“I’d say excellent. I mean, I didn’t have any problems or anything.” She was really getting into this now, trying to be objective but fair in her response.“We’re glad to hear that. And what is the anticipated length of your stay?”“I don’t know yet. I’ll be here at least one more night, but I don’t know much beyond that. You want me to notify you as soon as I find out?”“That won’t be necessary. We’re happy to have you with us for as long as it suits. Now if I could just ask you to confirm your room number, that’s all we’ll need.”“I’m in 1236.”“Perfect — 1236 corresponds with our records. And that completes the survey. We appreciate your patience, Ms. Hudson, and we hope you enjoy your stay. If we can be of any further service, please don’t hesitate to get in touch.”Now all I needed was a way to get into her room.I did a second tour of the lobby, this time looking for access to the back side of the house. I was interested in the freight elevators, service stairs, any unmarked door, or any door labeled Staff. I found one that said Employees Only. I pushed my way in and descended a short flight of concrete stairs to a door marked No Admittance. They must not have been serious because the door was unlocked and I walked right in.Every hotel has its public face: clean, carpeted, upholstered, glossy, paneled, and polished. The actual running of a hotel is done on much less glamorous terms. The corridor I stepped into had plain concrete walls and a floor of brown vinyl tile. The air here was much warmer and smelled like machinery, cooked food, and old mops. The ceilings were high and lined with pipes, thick cables, and heating ducts. I could hear the clatter of dishes, but the acoustics made it difficult to determine the source.I checked in both directions. To my left, wide metal doors had been rolled up and I could see the loading zone. Big trucks were backed up against the loading docks and security cameras were mounted in the corners, mechanical eyes observing anyone who passed within range. I didn’t want my presence noted, so I turned around and walked the other way.I moved on down the corridor and turned a corner into the first of several kitchens that opened off one another like a maze. Six ice machines were lined up along the wall in front of me. I counted twenty rolling metal food carts with racks for trays. The floors were freshly washed, glistening with water and smelling of disinfectant. I walked with care, passing big stainless-steel mixing bowls, soup vats, and industrial dishwashers billowing steam. Occasionally, a food service worker, in a white apron and a hairnet, would glance up at me with interest, but no one seemed to question my presence down there. A black woman was chopping green peppers. A white man was encasing one of the rolling carts with plastic sheeting to protect the food. There were big room-size ovens and stainless-steel refrigerators larger than the morgue at St. Terry’s Hospital. More workers in white aprons, hairnets, and plastic gloves were washing salad greens, arranging them on plates that had been laid out on the stainless-steel counter.I stuck my head into a big storage room the size of a National Guard armory, where there were cartons of ketchup bottles; cases of mustard, olives, pickles; shelves filled with packaged bread; racks of croissants, homemade tarts, cheesecakes, pies, rolls. Plastic bins were filled with fresh produce. The air was saturated with strong smells: cut onions, simmering tomato sauce, cabbage, celery, citrus, yeast; layer upon layer of cooking and cleaning odors. There was something unpleasant about the suffusion of scents, and I was keenly aware of my olfactory nerves conducting a confused array of data to ancient parts of my brain. It was a relief to come out on the far side of the complex. The temperature in the air dropped, and the scents were suddenly as clean as a forest’s. I found the main corridor and took a right.Ahead of me, a regular choo-choo train of linen carts was lined up against the wall. The canvas sides were yellow and bulged with the mountains of soiled sheets and towels. I set off, walking with great purpose, glancing into every room I passed. I paused in the door to the hotel laundry: a vast room filled with wall-mounted washing machines, most of which were much taller than I. A moving track was suspended from the ceiling and enormous mesh bags of linens swung around the curve on a series of hooks. Somewhere I could hear massive dryers at work. The air was dense with the smell of damp cotton and detergent. Two women in uniform were working in tandem with a machine whose function seemed to be the pressing and folding of hotel sheets. The women’s motions were repetitious, taking sheets out as the machine finished its twofold process. Each packet was refolded and stacked to one side, with no margin for error as the machine pushed the next newly pressed sheet into range.I continued down the corridor, slowing my pace. This time I passed a little half door with a narrow shelf that formed a small counter. The sign above the door said Employee Linens. Well, well, well. I paused, looking in on what must have been the laundry facility for employee uniforms. As in a dry cleaning establishment, several hundred matching cotton uniforms had been cleaned and pressed and hung on a mechanical conveyor awaiting pickup by the staff. I leaned across the Dutch door, peering through a thick forest of cleaners’ bags. There didn’t appear to be anyone in attendance.“Hello?”No answer.I turned the knob and opened the half door, easing in. I sorted through uniforms in rapid succession. Each uniform seemed to consist of a short red cotton skirt with a red tunic worn over it. Impossible to guess what sizes they were. A paper pinned to each hanger gave the first name of the wearer: Lucy, Guadalupe, Historia, Juanita, Lateesha, Mary, Gloria, Nettie. On and on the names went. I selected three at random and eased out again, closing the door behind me.“Can I help you?”I jumped, nearly bumping into the hefty white woman in a red uniform who was standing right behind me in the corridor. My mind went completely blank.The woman’s nostrils flared like she could smell deception. “What are you doing with those uniforms?” I could practically see up her nose, and it was not a pretty picture. Her name tag read Mrs. Spitz, Linen Service Supervisor.“Ah. Good question, Mrs. Spitz. I was just looking for you. I’m Jillian Brace’s assistant up in Sales and Marketing.” With my free hand, I reached in my blazer pocket and pulled out a business card, which I flashed at her.She snatched the card and studied it, squinting. “This says Burnham J. Pauley. What’s going on here?” She had a big face, and every feature on it seemed to quiver with suspicion.“Well,” I said. “Gosh. I’m glad you asked. Because. As a matter of fact, Corporate is considering new uniforms. For security reasons. And Mr. Pauley told Ms. Brace to show him a sample of what we had on hand.”“That’s the most ridiculous thing I ever heard,” she snapped. “We just got those uniforms, as Corporate well knows. Besides, that’s not proper procedure, and I’m sick of it. I told Mr. Tompkins at our last department meeting, this is my operation and I mean to keep it that way. You wait right here. I’m going to call him this minute. I will not have anyone from Corporate interfering in my business.” Even her breath smelled indignant. Her eyes swung back to mine. “What’s your name?”“Vikki Biggs.”“Where’s your name tag?”“Upstairs.”She pointed a finger at me. “Don’t you move. I intend to get to the bottom of this. Corporate has a nerve sending anyone down here like this. What’s Miss Brace’s extension?”“It’s 202,” I said automatically. Now you see? This is the beauty of keeping up those skills. In a crisis situation, I had only to open my mouth and a fib flopped out. An unpracticed liar can’t always rise to the occasion like I can.She let herself in through the Dutch door, moving with surprising speed. The door snapped shut behind her. I folded the hangers across my left arm and walked on with apparent purpose, heart thumping. I rounded the corner and broke into a trot. I found the stairwell and headed up the stairs two at a time. I didn’t dare risk the hotel elevators. I pictured Mrs. Spitz notifying Security, guards swarming the exits in search of me. By the third floor I was winded, but I kept right on climbing. I passed the sixth floor, gasping, thighs burning, knees feeling like my kneecaps were about to pop off. I finally staggered through the door at the landing marked “8” and found myself back on familiar turf, one bend of the corridor away from my room.I let myself into 815. I flung the contraband uniforms across the back of a chair and collapsed on the bed, which was now neatly made. I had to laugh while I lay there, trying to catch my breath. Mrs. Spitz better have her hormone levels checked or her medication adjusted. She was going to get herself fired if she continued to mouth off at Corporate. I half expected someone to come pounding at my door with demands and accusations, an itemized accounting of the lies I’d told.I got up and crossed to the door, where I slipped on the security chain. I spent the next few minutes trying on stolen uniforms. The first was the best fit. I looked at myself in the full-length mirror. The skirt was big in the waist, but it didn’t seem to matter much with the tunic pulled over it. Pinned to each tunic was a ruffle of white, which formed a sort of collar once it was buttoned into place. The tunic itself had a little puff to the sleeve. Color wasn’t bad. Worn with bare legs and my running shoes, I looked like I could clean a bathroom in nothing flat. I changed back into my jeans and hung my uniform in the closet. I wasn’t sure what to do with the two remaining uniforms, so I folded them together and stuck them in the desk drawer. Before I left the hotel, I’d find a place to put them.I ate a room service lunch, fearful of venturing out into the hotel so soon. At two o’clock, I went out into the corridor on a prospecting expedition, checking the general layout of the floor. I located the fire extinguisher, two fire exits, and the ice machine. A house phone sat on a console table across from the elevators. In the utility alcove at the end of the hall, I could see two linen carts angled into the space. I walked down there and spent a few minutes acquainting myself with available equipment. Extra irons and ironing boards, two vacuum cleaners. Beyond the alcove was a big linen closet, lined with shelves stacked nearly to the ceiling with clean sheets and towels. I could see cases of toilet paper and short towers of plastic pallets containing the miniature toiletries. Nice. I was liking this. An armload of towels usually provides good cover for getting into a room. I found a plastic door placard reading Maid in Room, which I snagged while I was at it.Having exhausted the possibilities, I went down to the gift shop and bought a book to read. 1 was forced to choose among fifteen torrid romance titles, which was all the hotel stocked. I paid for a handful of miniature Peppermint Patties, pausing in the lobby only long enough to ring Laura’s room. When she answered, I murmured, “Ooops, sorry,” and hung up. Sounded like I’d caught her in the middle of a nap. I whiled away the afternoon, reading and napping. In a spectacular failure of imagination, I ordered a room service dinner that was a duplicate of my room service lunch: cheeseburger, fries, and diet Pepsi.Shortly after seven o’clock, I stripped out of my jeans and donned my sassy red uniform. I wasn’t crazy about the bare legs with my running shoes, but what could I do? I stocked my pockets with peppermints and took the two remaining contraband uniforms from the drawer where I’d hidden them. I tucked my room key in my pocket and headed for the fire stairs. Going up, I paused on the tenth floor long enough to hang the two stolen uniforms in the utility alcove. I didn’t want the other maids inconvenienced by the theft.The twelfth floor was laid out identically to the eighth, except that the utility room didn’t seem as well stocked. I grabbed a dust rag and a vacuum cleaner, found an electrical outlet in the corridor, and began to vacuum my way toward Laura Huckaby’s room. The carpet was an extravagant meadow of geometric shapes, triangles overlapping in a bright path of high-low gold and green. Vacuuming is always restful: slow, repetitive motion accompanied by a low groaning noise and that satisfying snap when something really good gets sucked up. Never had the wall-to-wall carpet been so thoroughly cleaned. I was working up a sweat, but the effort did permit me to loiter at will.At 7:36 I heard the elevator ping and a room service wait-creature appeared with a dinner tray. He headed toward 1236; the tray balanced comfortably at shoulder height, he knocked on her door. I vacuumed in that direction, managing to get a glimpse of her when she let him in. She was barefoot and looking bulky in a hotel robe with a nightie hanging down below. The loungewear suggested she was in for the night, which was good from my perspective. The waiter emerged moments later. He passed me without remark and disappeared into the elevator without acknowledging my existence. On the off chance that Laura would have a visitor or head out to meet someone, I stuck to my surveillance.When I tired of vacuuming, I took out my dust rag and got down on my hands and knees, dusting baseboards that apparently hadn’t been touched for years. Sometimes it’s really tough to picture the boy detectives doing this. Periodically, I tilted my head against Laura Huckaby’s door without hearing a thing. Maybe if I barked and scratched, she’d let me in. Other hotel guests came and went at intervals, but no one paid me the slightest attention.Here’s what I’ve learned about being a maid: People seldom look you in the eye. Occasionally someone’s gaze might accidentally glance off your face, but based on the interaction, no one could identify you later in a lineup. Good news for me, although even in Texas I don’t think impersonating a maid would be classified as a crime.At 8:15 I returned the vacuum cleaner to the linen room and armed myself with a supply of fresh towels. I returned to 1236 and knocked, calling out “Housekeeping” in clear, bell-like tones. Worked like a charm. Moments later, Laura Huckaby opened the door a crack with the chain in place. “Yes?”Without eye makeup, her hazel eyes seemed soft and pale. Her complexion was made ruddy by the faint rash of freckles previously masked by foundation. She also had a dimple in her chin I hadn’t noticed earlier.I directed my comment to the doorknob so I wouldn’t seem uppity. “I’m here to turn the bed down.”“This hotel offers turn-down service?” She sounded appropriately startled, as if the idea were ludicrous.“Yes, ma’am.”She paused and then shrugged. “Just a minute,” she said. She closed the door. There was a delay of some minutes and then she released the chain and stepped aside to let me enter.I was interested to realize how much I could take in through my peripheral vision. How vain could she be? I could have sworn she’d paused to put on her makeup again. The tangled auburn hair had been freshly washed and still clung to her head. Warm, damp, shampoo-scented air wafted from the bathroom. I set the clean towels on the counter near the sink and then moved into the bedroom area and closed the drapes. The television set was turned on with the sound turned down. She’d tossed her room key on the desk. Immediately, I began to scheme to get my hands on it. I could see from the disarray that she’d been lying on the bed with the telephone pulled close. Maybe she’d received the call she’d been waiting for. There was no sign of the duffel bag as far as I could see.She took a seat at the desk with her magazine. She crossed her legs, and I caught just a flash of bare skin. Her right ankle and shin and all the way up to her knee was a sooty mass of old bruises, turning green at the edge. Had her fifty-some companion been beating the shit out of her? It would certainly explain her icy treatment of him and her obsession with her appearance. Her dinner tray still sat on the desk in front of her, a crumpled white cloth napkin tossed carelessly across the dirty plates. Whatever she’d ordered, she hadn’t eaten much. Though it was ostensibly my job, she seemed embarrassed to have me in the room, which actually worked to my advantage. She ignored me for the most part, though she would flick me an occasional self-conscious look. I was beginning to enjoy my invisibility. I could observe her at close range without any pesky personal exchanges. Was that the shadow of a bruise on the right side of her jaw, or was I imagining things? What kind of guy was she with? From all reports, he’d pounded Ray Rawson to a pulp, so he might have pounded her, too.My uniform made an efficient little rustling sound as I folded the spread in half and then in half again. I made a hefty jelly roll of it and tucked it in one corner. I turned the sheet down halfway, plumped the pillows, and left one of the paper-wrapped Peppermint Patties on the bed table.I returned to the vanity area and tidied up the sink, turning water off and on, though I didn’t do much else. I checked her makeup supply: a concealer stick, foundation, powder, blush. In a small round container, she had a product called DermaSeal, “a waterproof cosmetic to hide facial imperfections.” I peered around the corner at her briefly, only to find her peering at me. Behind me was the closet, which I longed to search. I moved into the bathroom and picked up a damp towel she’d draped across the edge of the tub. I straightened the shower curtain and flushed the toilet as if I’d just given it a scrub. I moved back into the vanity area and opened the closet door. Bingo. The duffel.I heard her call out, “What are you doing?” She sounded annoyed, and I thought I might have overstepped my bounds.“You need more hangers, miss?”“What? No. I have plenty.”Just being helpful. She didn’t have to sound so irritated.I closed the closet door and retrieved the remaining clean towels. She’d crossed the room and was watching me closely as I finished my chores. I transferred my gaze to a point to the left of her. “What about the tray? I can take it if you’re finished.”She flicked a look at the desk. “Please.”I set the towels aside and crossed to the desk, where I picked up the room key and tucked it on the tray, concealing it with the crumpled napkin. I went over to the door and held it open with my hip while I set the tray on the floor in the corridor. I retrieved my towel supply.She was standing near the door with something that she held in my direction. At first, I thought she was passing me a note. Then I realized she was giving me a tip. I murmured a “Thank you” and slipped the bill in my tunic pocket without looking at the denomination. Peeking might have implied a grasping nature on my part. “You have a pleasant evening,” I said.“Thanks.”As soon as I was out the door, I pulled out the bill and checked the denomination. Oh, wow. She’d given me a five. Not bad for a simple ten-minute tidy-up. Maybe I could knock on the door across the hall. If I covered the floor, I could just about afford my room tonight. I plucked her key from the room service tray and left the tray where it was. It looked tacky sitting there, and I didn’t like the effect on my newly cleaned hall, but in current job parlance, removing it was not my department.
