---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "L Is for Lawless - index_split_006.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - L Is for Lawless"
tags: ["could", "said", "back", "two", "one", "door", "bucky", "johnny", "get", "think", "got", "well", "like", "took", "head", "side", "right", "might", "ray", "went", "chester", "hand", "anything", "key", "air"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/LIsforLawless-indexsplit006html

---


Unknown
Chapter 5By ten a.m. I found myself back at Bucky’s. I knocked on the door, but after several minutes went by and nobody answered, I headed down the driveway toward the back. The miscellaneous collection of cardboard boxes had been shoved to one side to make the driveway passable. The garage door on the left was standing open and the Buick was missing. Maybe the three of them had gone out to breakfast. The other half of the two-car garage was piled high with junk, an impenetrable mountain of boxes, old furniture, appliances, and lawn care equipment.The cardboard box full of World War II books was right on top. I dragged it over to the stairs and made myself comfortable while I sorted through the contents. I finally found what I was looking for at the bottom of the box in a book called Fighter! The Story of Air Combat 1936-45 by Robert Jackson.On 4 July 1942 the American Volunteer Group officially ceased to be an independent fighting unit and became part of the newly-activated China Air Task Force, under command of the Tenth Air Force. Command of the CATF devolved on Claire Chennault, who exchanged his Chinese uniform for an American one and was given the rank of brigadier-general.The AVG pilots, who had held the fort in Burma for so long against impossible odds, scattered far and wide. Few of them elected to remain in China. Those who did formed the nucleus of the new 23rd Fighter Group, still flying war-weary P-40s.A few names followed: Charles Older, “Tex” Hill, Ed Rector, and Gil Bright. What interested me was the fact that the AVG pilots were recruited by the Central Aircraft Manufacturing Company between April and July 1941. All of them were serving U.S. military personnel, bound to CAMCO by a one-year contract. But Bucky had told me Chester remembered his father arriving home after two years overseas in time for his fourth birthday party, August 17, 1944. Because he was so specific, the date had stuck in my mind and I’d jotted it down on an index card. The problem was, the AVG had already been out of business for two years at that point. So where did the truth lie? Had Johnny actually served with the AVG? More important, had he served at all? Chester would see the discrepancy in dates as confirmation of his theory. I could just imagine his response. “Hell, the AVG was just a cover story. I could have told you that.” Chester probably envisioned his father parachuting behind enemy lines, perhaps even feigning capture so he could confer with the Japanese high command.On the other hand, if he’d never been in the service, then maybe he’d only acquired the books so he could bullshit about the subject. And that might explain why he was unwilling to talk about the war. It was always going to be risky because he might well run into someone who’d been in the very unit he was claiming to have served. By creating the impression of government secrecy, he could account for his reluctance to discuss the details that might give him away.I scanned the backyard, staring at the Ford Fairlane, sitting up on concrete blocks. Why did I care one way or the other? The old guy was dead. If it comforted his son and his grandson to believe he was a war hero (or, more grandiose yet, a spy whose cover had gone undetected now for more than forty years), what difference did it make to me? I wasn’t being paid to shoot holes in Johnny’s story. I wasn’t being paid to do anything. So why not let it drop?Because it’s contrary to my nature said she to herself. I’m like a little terrier when it comes to the truth. I have to stick my nose down the hole and dig until I find out what’s in there. Sometimes I get bitten, but that’s the chance I’m usually willing to take. In some ways, I didn’t care so much about the nature of the truth as knowing what it consisted of.I became aware of the big six-inch key digging into my hip. I stretched my leg out and slid my hand into my jeans pocket. I pulled out the key and held it in my palm, hefting the weight. I rubbed my thumb along the darkened surface. I squinted at the tarnished metal just as Babe had done. The name of the lock company seemed to be faintly stamped on the shaft, but I couldn’t figure out what it said in this light. It didn’t appear to be any of the lock companies I knew: Schlage, Weslock, Weiser, or Yale. The safe had been an Amsec, strictly a combination lock, so I didn’t think the key was in any way connected with that.I hauled myself to my feet and slid the key back in my pocket. I was restless, trying to figure out what to do until Chester got home. It was always possible his memory was faulty. I’d only heard the story from Bucky, and he might have gotten the dates wrong. Ray Rawson had told me he worked with Johnny in the boatyards just after the war started, which had to be sometime in 1942. It struck me as odd that someone who’d known Johnny in the “olden” days had suddenly shown up on the old man’s doorstep. Despite the offhand explanation, I wondered if there was something else going on.The Lexington Hotel was located on a side street a block off lower State Street near the beach. The structure was a chunky five-story box of weary-looking yellow brick, spanning an arcade that ran across the ground floor. On one side of the building, a jagged crack, like a lightning bolt, staggered through the brick from the roof to the foundation, suggesting earthquake damage that probably dated back to 1925. The letters of the word Lexington descended vertically on a sign affixed to one corner of the building, a buzzing yellow band of neon with dead bugs in the loops. The marquee boasted • DAILY MAID • PHONE • COLOR TV IN EVERY ROOM. The entrance was flanked by a Mexican restaurant on one side and by a bar on the other. A blaring jukebox in each establishment competed for air space, a jarring juxtaposition of Linda Ronstadt and Helen Reddy.I moved into a lobby that was sparsely furnished and smelled of bleach. Two rows of potted fan palms were arranged on either side of a length of trampled-looking red carpet that heralded the path to the front desk. The desk clerk was not in evidence. I picked up the house phone and asked the operator to connect me with Ray Rawson’s room. He answered after two rings and I identified myself. We spoke briefly and he directed me to his fourth-floor digs. “Take the stairs. The elevator takes forever,” he said as he hung up.I took the stairs two at a time just to test my lung capacity. By the second-floor landing, I was winded and had to slow down. I clung to the stair railing while I climbed the last flight. Being fit in one sport seems to have no bearing on any other. I know joggers who wouldn’t last twenty minutes on a stationary bike and swimmers who couldn’t jog more than a mile without collapsing.I composed myself slightly before I knocked at 407. Ray opened the door with a buzzing portable electric shaver in his hand. He was barefoot, in chinos and a white T-shirt, his balding head still damp from the shower. The already closely clipped fringe of gray had been trimmed since yesterday. His smile was embarrassed, and the gap between his two front teeth gave him an air of innocence. He motioned me in. “You’re too quick. I was trying to get this done before you got all the way up here. Be right back.”He moved into the bathroom, the buzzing sound of the shaver fading as he closed the door.His room was spacious and plain: white walls, white bedspread, rough white cotton curtains pulled back on fat wooden rods. There were only two windows, but both were double wide, looking out onto the backside of the building across the alleyway. The carpet was gray and seemed relatively clean. The glimpse I had of the bathroom showed glossy white ceramic tile walls and a floor of one-inch black and white hexagonals. Ray returned, smelling strongly of aftershave.“This is not bad,” I said, turning halfway around.“Fifty bucks a night. I asked about weekly rates, just until I get a place of my own. I don’t suppose Bucky’s said anything about the rental.”“Not to me,” I said. “Did you hear they had a break-in?”“Who did? You mean, Bucky and them? When was this?”I gave him the Reader’s Digest condensed version of the story, watching as his smile was extinguished by disbelief and then concern.“Jeez. That’s terrible,” he said, and then he caught my expression. “Wait a minute. Why look at me? I hope you don’t think I had anything to do with it.”“It just seems odd there wasn’t any problem until you showed up. Johnny died four months ago. You blow in last week and now Chester’s suddenly got problems.”“Come on. Hey. I was sitting in the bar last night, watching big-screen TV. You can ask anyone.”“Mind if I sit?”“Sure, go ahead. Take the good one. I’ll take this.”There was one hard wooden chair and one upholstered chair. Ray steered me toward the latter and took the wood chair for himself. He placed his hands on his knees, rubbing the fabric as if his palms were sweating. “I’m probably the oldest and best friend Johnny ever had. I’d never do anything to mess with his son or his grandson or anything like that. You have to believe me.”“I’m not accusing you, Ray.”“Sure sounds like that to me.”“If I thought you’d broken in, I probably wouldn’t have come up here. I’d have gone to the cops and had ’em dust for prints.”“They didn’t do that?”“Chester can’t be sure anything was taken, which means it wasn’t even a burglary as far as the cops are concerned. The techs here only lift prints at the scene of a major crime. Felonies, not misdemeanors. Malicious mischief wouldn’t qualify unless thousands of dollars’ worth of damage had been done, which wasn’t true in this case.” What I didn’t bother to say was the procedure is lengthy and the department is perpetually backed up. Three weeks is standard. In a rush situation, prints could be lifted, photographed, and traced, with the resultant tracings being faxed to CAL ID in Sacramento. The turnaround time could be a day or two. In this case, we didn’t even have a suspect. Except maybe him, I thought. I watched him, acutely aware of the key in my pocket. I didn’t want him to know about that just yet. He seemed like a man who had something on his mind, and I wanted to hear his tale before I told him mine. “What’s in Ashland?” I asked.There was a millisecond’s pause. “I got family back there.”“Was Johnny really in the service?”“I have no idea. I already told you, I lost track of him for years.”“How’d you connect up again?”“Johnny got in touch.”“How’d he know where to find you?”Impatience flashed across his face as if his picture were being taken. “Because he had my address. What is this? I don’t have to answer this stuff. It’s none of your damn business.”“I’m just trying to get to the bottom of this.”“Well, try somewhere else.”“Chester thinks Johnny was a spy during World War Two, some kind of double agent for the Japanese.”Ray rolled his eyes briefly and then gave his head a quick shake. “Where’d he get that?”“It’s too complicated to explain. He says the old man was very paranoid. He thinks that’s part of it.”Ray said, “The old guy was paranoid, but it didn’t have anything to do with the Japs.”“What, then?”“Why should I tell you? I have no reason to trust you any more than you trust me.”“And here I thought we were such pals,” I said.“Well, we’re not,” he said mildly.I eased the key out of my pocket and held it up to the light. “You know anything about this?”His gaze flicked to the key. “Where’d you get that?”“It was in a safe Bucky found in Johnny’s apartment. Have you ever seen it before?”“No.”“What about the safe? Did you know about that?”He shook his head slowly. This was like pulling teeth.“I don’t understand what the deal is,” I said.“There’s no deal. It’s nothing.”“If it’s nothing, why not tell? It can’t do any harm.”“Look, I might know who busted in. If it’s who I think, then some guy might have followed me out here. That’s all it is, and I could be wrong about that.”“What was he after?”“Jeez. Don’t you ever give up?”“You must have some idea.”“Well, I don’t.”“Of course you do,” I said. “Why else would you drive all the way out here from Ashland?”Agitated, he got up and crossed to the window, shoving his hands in his pockets. “Hey, come on. Enough. I’m getting tired of this. You can’t force me to answer, so you might as well lay off.”I got up and followed him to the window, leaning against the wall so I could watch his face. “Here’s the way my mind works. This sounds like something criminal.” I tapped my temple. “I’m thinking to myself, What if Johnny never went into the Air Force? I keep having trouble with that piece of it. If he wasn’t in the service, then the whole picture shifts. Because then you have to wonder where he was all that time.”Ray’s gaze met mine. He started to say something, but he seemed to think better of it.“Want to hear my theory? I just came up with this,” I said. “He might have been in prison. Maybe this business about the Air Force — this AVG bullshit — was just a polite explanation for his absence. The war had started by then. It sounds a lot more patriotic to say your husband’s gone overseas than he’s been sent up.” I waited a moment, but Ray made no response. I cupped a hand behind my ear. “Care to comment?”He shook his head. “It’s your theory. You can think anything you want.”“You’re not going to help me out?”“Not a bit,” he said.I pushed away from the wall. “Well. Maybe you’ll change your mind. I live around the corner from Johnny’s, five doors down on Albanil. You can stop by and chat when you’re ready.” I moved toward the door.“I don’t get this,” he said. “I mean, what’s it to you?”I looked back at him. “I have a hunch, and I’d like to find out if I’m right. In my line of work, it’s good practice.”For lunch, I treated myself to a Quarter Pounder with Cheese and then spent the afternoon curled up with the new Elmore Leonard novel. I’d been telling myself how much fun it was having nothing to do, but I noticed that I was faintly disconcerted by the idleness. Generally, I don’t think of myself as compulsive, but I don’t like wasting time. I tidied my apartment and cleaned out some drawers, went back to my book, and tried to concentrate. Late in the afternoon, I shrugged into my blazer and walked up to the corner for a bite to eat. I was thinking about an early movie if I could figure out what to see.The neighborhood was quiet, half the front porches picked out in light. There was a chill in the air, and the dark seemed to be coming down earlier and earlier. I could smell somebody’s supper cooking, and the images were cozy. Once in a while I find myself at loose ends, and that’s when I feel the lack of a relationship. There’s something about love that brings a sense of focus to life. I wouldn’t complain about the sex, either, if I could remember how it went. I’d have to get out the instructor’s manual if I ever managed to get laid again.Rosie’s was nearly empty, but shortly after I sat down, I spotted Babe and Bucky coming through the door. I waved and the two of them approached my back booth, walking hip to hip, their arms wound around each other’s waists.I said, “Where’s your dad, Bucky? I’ve been hoping to run into him. We need to talk.”“He took a load over to the dump, but he should be back shortly,” Bucky said. “You want to join us? We thought we’d sit at the bar and watch the six o’clock news until Dad gets here.” In the half-light of the tavern, he was looking nearly handsome. Babe was in boots, a long jeans skirt, and a blue jeans jacket.“Thanks, but I may try to eat quick and catch an early movie.”“Well, we’ll be over there if you should change your mind.” They sauntered off to the bar.Meanwhile, Rosie appeared from the kitchen and I watched her draw two beers before she came over to me. She had already pulled out her pencil and order pad and was scribbling away. “I got perfect dish for you,” she said as she snatched my dinner menu. “Is slices pork liver with sausage and garlic pickles, cook with bacon. Also, I’m making you apple-and-savoy-cabbage salad with crackling biscuits.”“Sounds inspired,” I said. I didn’t say by what.“You gonna have this with beer. Is better than wine, which don’t mix good with garlic pickles.”“I should say not.”I ate, I must say, with a hearty appetite, though I’d probably have indigestion later. The place was beginning to fill up with the Happy Hour crowd, people from the neighborhood and singles getting off work. Rosie’s had become a favorite hangout among the local sporting set, thus ruining it for those of us in search of peace and quiet. If it weren’t for my fondness for Rosie and the close proximity to my apartment, I might have moved on to some new eatery. I saw Bucky and Babe move over to a table. Chester came in moments later, and the three conferred before ordering supper. By then the place was so noisy that it didn’t seem tactful to join them and launch into talk about Johnny’s past history.At 6:35 I paid my check and headed out the front door. I was already losing interest in the movie, but there was always a chance I could generate enthusiasm from “the sibs.”When I got home, I crossed the back patio and knocked at the frame. I heard a muffled “Yoohoo!” I peered in through the screen and spotted Nell sitting in a wooden kitchen chair pulled up close to the stove. She was peering in my direction, and when she saw me she motioned me in.I opened the door and stuck my head in. “Hi, Nell. How are you?” The stove had been dismantled — the oven door open, oven racks removed — apparently in preparation for a thorough cleaning. The counter was lined with newspaper on which the oven racks were laid, still seething with oven cleaner.“Fine and dandy. Come on in, Kinsey. It’s good to see you.” Ordinarily she wore her thick silver hair pulled back in an elaborate arrangement of tortoise-shell combs, but today she’d tied her hair into the folds of a scarf, which made her look like an ancient Cinderella.“You’re industrious,” I said. “You just got here and already you’re hard at work.”“Well, I’m not happy until I can take a stove apart and really clean in there good. Henry’s extremely able when it comes to household chores, but a stove is the sort of thing needs a woman’s touch. I know that sounds sexist, but it’s the truth,” she said.“You need help?”“I could sure use the company.” Nell was wearing a pinafore-style apron over her cotton housedress, her long sleeves protected by cuffs of paper toweling that she’d secured with rubber bands. She was a big woman, probably close to six feet tall in her prune. Wide shouldered, heavy breasted, she had good-size feet and hands, though her knuckles were now as knotted as ropes beneath the skin. Her face was long and bony, nearly sexless in its character, sparse white brows, electric blue eyes, her skin vertically draped with seams and folds.All the shelves had been emptied from the refrigerator, the countertops crowded with leftovers in covered bowls, olive and pickle jars, condiments, raw vegetables. The storage drawers had been removed and one was sitting in a sink full of soapy water. She’d tossed a number of items in the kitchen wastebasket, and I could see that she’d dumped something gloppy in the disposal.“Don’t look at that. I think it’s still alive,” she said. She was wringing out the cloth she was using to wipe down the shelves. “Once I finish this, I intend to take a bubble bath and then I’ll get into my robe and slippers. I have some reading to catch up on. I keep thinking any day now my eyes are going out on me and I want to get in as much as possible.” She had unscrewed a jar lid and was peering in. She sniffed, unable to identify the contents. “What in heaven’s name is this?” She held it up to the light. The liquid was bright red and syrupy.“I think it’s the glaze for the cherry tart Henry makes. You know he cleaned the refrigerator just two days ago.”She screwed the lid back on and put the jar on the counter. “That’s what he said. As it happens, cleaning refrigerators is one of my specialties. I taught Henry how to do it back in 1912. His problem is he isn’t sufficiently rigorous. Most of us aren’t when it comes to our own trash. As long as I’m here I might as well get everything shipshape.”“Was that your lot in life, teaching all the boys how to do things around the house?”“More or less. I helped Mother raise and educate all ten of us at home. After Father died, I felt obliged to stay on until she recovered her spirits, which took close to thirty years. She was heartsick when she lost him, though as I recollect, the two of them never got along that well. My, my. How she did grieve for the man. It occurred to me later she was putting on a bit just to keep me underfoot.”“Ten kids? I thought there were only five. You, Charlie, Lewis, William, and Henry.”She shook her head. “We were the five surviving children. We took after the Tilmanns, on our mother’s side. In our family, there was a distinct division among the children she bore. Half took after her side of the family and the other half took after the Pitts on Father’s side. Line us up for a photograph and you could see it plain as day. Now this is a fact. All Father’s people up and died. It was a pitiful genetic line when you stop and calculate. They were small people with tiny heads, so they didn’t have the brains our side of the family did and they had no physical stamina whatsoever. Our father’s mother was a ‘Mauritz’ by birth. The name translates as ‘Moorish,’ which suggests a bunch of blackamoors somewhere up the line. They were swarthy, all of them, and just as feeble as could be. Our grandmother Mauritz died of the influenza, and so did two brothers above me. It was a mess. She went and he went and the other one went. Our sister, Alice, was another one we lost. Dark skinned, tiny head, she died of the influenza within a day of taking sick. Four cousins, an aunt. Sometimes two would go on the same day and we’d have a double funeral. That entire line was wiped out in a five-month period between November and March. Those of us who took after Mother are the only ones left, and we expect to go on for years. Mother lived to be a hundred and three. Right about the time she turned ninety, she got so crabby we threatened to withhold her sour mash whiskey if she didn’t straighten up. She only required six tablespoons a day, but she believed it was absolutely essential to life. We put the bottle right up on the shelf where she could see it but couldn’t reach. That settled her right down, and she went on for another thirteen years just as gentle as a lamb.”She closed the refrigerator door temporarily and returned to the sink, where the dishwater was now cool enough to allow her to wash the meat bin. She opened the cabinet under the sink, and I saw a frown cross her face.“What’s the matter?”“Henry’s out of the oven cleaner I like to use on these racks.” She peered in the cabinet again. “Well, I’ll just have to use a little elbow grease.”“You want me to make a quick run to the market? I can pick some up. It won’t take ten minutes.”“No, that’s all right. I can always use a scrub pad. It’ll clean up in a jiffy. You have other things to do.”“I don’t mind a bit. I was thinking about a movie, but I’ve lost interest, to tell the truth.”“Are you sure you don’t mind?”“Scout’s honor,” I said.“I’d surely appreciate it. We’re low on milk, too. Once the kids have their milk and cookies tonight, there won’t be enough for breakfast. This is really awfully sweet.”“Don’t even think about it. I’ll be back shortly. What kind of milk? Low fat?”“Half a gallon of skim. I’m trying to wean the kids off fat where I can.”I searched through my handbag for the car keys and then eased the strap across my shoulder as I headed out the door. My car was parked about two doors down. I fired up the ignition and pulled away from the curb. At the corner of Albanil and Bay, I turned right, passing Bucky’s place, which had become my new reference point in the neighborhood. I’d probably never pass the house again without turning to look. I peered down the drive toward the garage apartment. Lights were on upstairs, and I saw a shadow move across the front windows.I slowed to a stop, peering up at the apartment. I didn’t think any of the Lees were home. The last I’d seen, the three of them were still up at Rosie’s having supper. The lights went out and I saw someone emerge onto the darkened landing.Well, this was interesting. I spotted a parking place and pulled in at the curb. I turned the engine off and doused my headlights. I adjusted the rearview mirror so that it was angled on the drive and then slid down in the seat.A man moved out of the driveway with a hefty-looking duffel bag in his right hand. He was walking in my direction, his head down, his shoulders hunched. From the dim glow of the street lamp, I could see it wasn’t Bucky, Chester, or Ray. This guy had a full head of dark, curly hair. His clothing was dark, and he must have been wearing rubber-soled shoes because his footsteps made hardly any sound on the pavement as he passed. He set off across the street. I kept him in sight, watching with curiosity as he approached a white Ford Taurus parked at the far curb, facing the opposite direction. He shifted the duffel to his left hand while he took out his car keys and unlocked the door on the driver’s side. Puzzled, I glanced back toward Bucky’s, but the premises were still dark and there were no signs of life.The man opened the door and shoved the duffel toward the passenger seat, slid in behind the wheel, and slammed the car door shut. I watched as he checked his reflection in the rearview mirror, smoothed his hair back, and settled a Stetson on his head. I eased out of sight while he started his ignition, flipped the lights on, and took off, his headlights raking my windshield. As soon as he turned the corner, I started my car and pulled away from the curb. I did a quick U-turn, yanked on my headlights, and took the corner maybe six seconds after he had. I caught a glimpse of his taillights as he turned right on Castle. I had to floor it to maintain visual contact. Within minutes he’d turned onto the northbound freeway off-ramp, heading toward Colgate. I eased into the line of traffic two cars behind him and kept my foot firmly pressed to the accelerator.
