---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "M Is for Malice - index_split_017.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - M Is for Malice"
tags: ["jack", "one", "said", "lonnie", "like", "never", "know", "guy", "must", "see", "christie", "went", "think", "house", "shoe", "could", "seen", "donovan", "look", "thought", "left", "time", "hand", "first", "anything"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/MIsforMalice-indexsplit017html

---


Unknown
SIXTEENI caught Lonnie’s secretary, Ida Ruth, on her way back from the kitchen with a coffeepot in hand. I hooked a thumb in the direction of Lonnie’s door. “Is he in there?”“He’s eating breakfast. Help yourself.”I tapped on the door and then opened it, peering in. Lonnie was sitting at his desk with an oversized plastic container of some kind of-chalky-looking protein drink. I could see bubbles of dried powder floating on the surface and the barest suggestion of a milky mustache on Lonnie’s upper lip. From assorted bottles, he’d emptied out a pile of vitamins and nutritional supplements, and he was popping down pills between sips of a shake so thick it might have been melted ice cream. One of the gel caps was the size and the color of a stone in a topaz dinner ring. He swallowed it as though he were doing a magic trick.Lonnie more nearly resembles a bouncer than an attorney. He’s short and stocky-five feet four, two hundred four pounds-bulging with muscles from his twenty years of power lifting. He’s got one of those revved-up metabolisms that burns calories like crazy and he radiates high energy along with body heat. His speech is staccato and he’s generally amped up on coffee, anxiety, or lack of sleep. I’ve heard people claim he’s on the sauce-shooting anabolic steroids in concert with all the iron he pumps. Personally, I doubt it. He’s been manic for the whole nine years of our acquaintance and I’ve never seen him exhibit any of the rage, or aggression allegedly generated by extended steroid use. He’s married to a woman with a black belt in karate and she’s never once complained about testicles shriveled to the size of raisins, another unhappy side effect of steroid abuse.His usually shaggy hair had. been trimmed and subdued. His dress shirt was pulled tightly across his shoulders and biceps. I don’t know his neck size, but he claims a tie makes him feel he’s on the brink of being hanged. The one he was wearing was pulled askew, his collar unbuttoned, and his suit jacket off. He’d hung it neatly from a hanger hooked through the handle of a file drawer. His shirt was spanking white, but badly wrinkled, and he had rolled up the sleeves. Sometimes he wears a vest to conceal his rumpled state, but not today. He swallowed the last of a palmful of pills, holding up a hand to indicate that he was aware of me. He chugged off the balance of his protein drink and shook his head with satisfaction. “Whew, that’s good.”“Are you tied up at the moment?”“Not at all. Come on in.”I entered the office and closed the door behind me. “I just got a call from Christie Malek. Have you been following that, story?”“The murder? Who hasn’t? Sit, sit, sit. I’m not due in court until two P.M. What’s up?”“Jack Malek’s been arrested and needs to talk to an attorney. I told Christie I’d see if you were interested.” I took a seat in one of two black leather client chairs.“When was he picked up?”“Fifteen or twenty minutes ago, I’d guess.”Lonnie began to screw the lids back on the motley collection of bottles sitting on his desk. “What’s the deal? Fill me in.”I brought him up to speed on the case as succinctly as possible. This was our first conversation about the murder and I wanted him to have as thorough an understanding as I could muster on short notice. As I spoke, I could see Lonnie’s gears engage and the wheels start to turn. I was saying, “Last I heard-this was from the housekeeper-Guy and Jack quarreled after hours of heavy drinking and Jack went off to a pairings’ party at the country club.”“I wonder how the cops are gonna bust that one. You’d think at least half a dozen people would have seen him there.” Lonnie shot a glance at his watch and began to roll his sleeves down. “I’ll pop on over to the station house and see what’s going on. I hope Jack has sense enough to keep his mouth shut until I get there.”He pushed away from his desk and took his suit jacket from the hanger. He shrugged himself into it, secured his collar button, and slid his tie into place. Now he looked more like a lawyer, albeit a short, beefy one. “By the way, where does Jack fit? He the oldest or the youngest?”“The youngest. Donovan’s the oldest. He runs the company. Bennet’s in the middle. I wouldn’t rule him out if you’re looking to divert suspicion. He was the most vocal in his opposition to Guy’s claim on the estate. You want me to do anything before you get back?”“Tell Christie I’ll be in touch as soon as I’ve talked to him. In the meantime, go on over to the house. Let’s put together a list of witnesses who can confirm Tuesday night. The cops find the murder weapon?”“They must have. I know they did a grid search of the property because I saw ’em doing it. And Christie says they carted off all kinds of things.”“Once I finish with Jack, I’ll have a chat with the cops and find out why they think he’s good for thins. It’d be nice to have some idea what we’re up against.”“Am I officially on the clock?”He looked at his watch. “Go.”“The usual rates?”“Sure. Unless you want to work for free. Of course, it’s always possible Jack won’t hire me.”“Don’t be silly. The man’s desperate,” I said. I caught Lonnie’s look and amended my claim. “Well, you know what I mean. He’s not hiring you because he’s desperate-”“Get out of here,” Lonnie said, smiling.Briefcase in hand, I hiked back over to the public parking lot, where I retrieved my car. My attitude toward Jack Malek had already undergone a shift. Whether Jack was guilty or innocent, Lonnie would hustle up every shred of exculpatory evidence and plot, plan, maneuver, and strategize to establish his defense. I was no particular fan of Jack’s, but working for Lonnie Kingman I’d be kept in the loop.As I approached the Maleks’, I was relieved to see that the roadway on either side of the estate was virtually deserted. The shoulder was churned with tire prints, the ground strewn with cigarette stubs, empty cups, crumpled paper napkins, and fast-food containers. The area outside the gate had the look of abandonment, as if a traveling circus had packed up and crept away at first light. The press had all but disappeared, following the patrol car taking Jack to County Jail. For Jack, it was the beginning of a process in which he’d be photographed, frisked, booked, fingerprinted,, and placed in a holding cell. I’d been through the process myself about a year ago and the sense of contamination was still vivid. The facility itself is clean and freshly painted, but institutional nonetheless; no-frills linoleum and government-issue furniture built to endure hard wear. In my brush with them, the jail officers were civil, pleasant, and businesslike, but I’d felt diminished by every aspect of the procedure, from the surrender of my personal possessions to the subsequent confinement in the drunk tank. I can still remember the musky smell in the air, mixing with the odors of stale mattresses, dirty armpits, and bourbon fumes being exhaled. As far as I knew, Jack had never been arrested and I suspected he’d feel as demoralized as I had.As I drove the VW up to the gate, a hired security guard stepped forward, blocking my progress until I identified myself. He waved me on and I eased up the driveway into the cobblestone courtyard. The house was bathed in sunlight, the grounds dappled with shade. The old, sprawling oak trees stretched away on all sides, creating a hazy landscape as if done in watercolors. Tones of green and gray seemed to bleed into one another with the occasional spare sapling providing sharp contrast. I could see two gardeners at work; one with a leaf blower, one with a rake. The sounds of machinery suggested that branches were being trimmed somewhere out of sight. The air smelled of mulch and eucalyptus. There was no sign of the search team and no uniformed officer posted at the front door. To all intents and purposes, life had reverted to normal.Christie must have been watching, perhaps hoping for Donovan. Before I was even out of the car, she’d come onto the porch and down the steps, walking in my direction. She wore a white T-shirt and dark blue wraparound skirt, her arms folded in front of her as though for comfort. The sheen in her dark hair had faded to a dull patina, like cheap floor wax on hardwood. Her face showed little of her emotions except for a thin crease, like a hairline crack, that had appeared between her eyes. “I heard the car on the drive and thought it might be Bennet or Donovan. Lord, I’m glad to see you. I’ve been going crazy here by myself.”“You still haven’t gotten through to Donovan?”“I left word at the office, saying it was urgent. I didn’t want to blab all our business to his secretary. I’ve been waiting by the phone, but so far I haven’t heard a word from him. Who knows where Bennet is? What about Lonnie Kingman? Did you talk to him?”I filled her in on Lonnie’s intentions. “Have the police unsealed the bedroom?”“Not yet. I meant to ask about that when they showed up this morning. I thought they came to do something up there. Take photographs or measure or move the furniture. I never imagined they were here to arrest anyone. I wish you could have seen Jack. He was scared to death.”“I’m not surprised. What about you? How are you holding up?”“I’m antsy. And feel my fingers. They’re as cold as ice. I catch myself pacing, half the time jabbering away. This is all so unreal. We may have problems, but we don’t kill one another. It’s ridiculous. I don’t understand what’s going on. Everything was fine and now this.” She seemed to shudder, not from cold, but from tension and anxiety. In the wake of Jack’s arrest, she’d clearly erased all her earlier complaints.I followed her around the front and into the house. The foyer felt chilly and again I was struck by the shabbiness. A wall sconce hung awry. In the hanging chandelier, several flame shaped bulbs were missing and some were tilted like crooked teeth. The tapestries along the wall were genuine, faded and worn, depicting acts of debauchery and cruelty picked out in thread. I felt my gaze pulled irresistibly toward the stairs, but the landing above was empty and there was no unusual sound to set my teeth on edge. The house was curiously quiet, given events of the past few days. These people didn’t seem to have friends rushing in with offers of help. I wasn’t aware of anyone bringing food or calling to ask if there was anything to be done. Maybe the Maleks were the sort who didn’t invite such familiarities. Whatever the reason, it looked like they were coping without the comfort of friends.Christie was still chatting, processing Jack’s arrest. I’ve noticed that people tend to drone on and on when they’re unnerved. “When I saw Detective Robb on the doorstep, I honestly thought they were coming with information and then they asked if Jack was in and I still didn’t think anything about it. I don’t even know what’s supposed to happen next.”We moved into the library, where I sank into a club chair and Christie paced the floor. I said, “I guess it depends on what he’s charged with and if bail’s been set. Once he’s booked in, the DA has twenty-four hours to file his case. Jack has to be arraigned within forty-eight hours, excluding Sundays and holidays, of course. So this is what, Thursday? They’ll probably take him before a magistrate today or tomorrow.”“What’s arraignment? What does that mean? I don’t know the first thing. I’ve never known anyone who’s been arrested, let alone charged with murder.”“Arraignment’s the process by which he’s formally charged. They’ll take him into court and identify him as the person named in the warrant. He’ll be told the nature of the charges against him and he’ll be asked to plead guilty, not guilty, or no contest.”“And then what?”“That’s up to Lonnie. If he thinks the evidence is weak, he’ll demand a preliminary hearing without waiving time. That means within ten court days-two weeks-they’ll have to have him in there for a prelim. For that, the prosecuting attorney’s present, the defendant and his counsel, the clerk, and the investigating officer, blah, blah, blah. Witnesses are sworn in and testimony’s taken. At the end of it, if it appears either that no public offense has been committed or that there’s not sufficient cause to believe the defendant’s guilty, then he’s discharged. On the other hand, if there’s sufficient evidence to show the offense has been committed and sufficient cause to believe the defendant’s guilty, then he’s held to answer. An information’s filed that’s a formal, written accusation-in Superior Court, he enters a plea, and the matter’s set for trial. There’s usually a lot of bullshit thrown in, but that’s essentially what happens.”She paused in her pacing and turned to stare at me, aghast. “And Jack’s in jail all this time?”“He’s not allowed to post bail on a homicide.”“Oh my God.”“Christie, I’ve been in jail myself. It’s not the end of the world. The company’s not that great and the food’s off the charts when it comes to fat content-hey, no wonder I liked it,” I added in an aside.“It isn’t funny.”“Who’s being funny? It’s the truth,” I said. “There are worse things in life. Jack might not like it, but he’ll survive.”She reached out and placed a hand on the mantelpiece to steady herself. “Sorry. I’m really sorry. I didn’t mean to snap at you.”“You better have a seat.”She did as I suggested, perching on the edge of the chair next to mine. “You must have come for some reason. I never even asked what it was.”“Lonnie was hoping you’d know who was at the club that night. We need someone who can verify Jack’s presence at the pairings’ party.”“That shouldn’t be too hard. I guess the police are already talking to people at the country club. I’m not sure what the deal is on that. I’ve gotten two calls this morning, one from Paul Trasatti, who says he needs to talk to Jack, like pronto.”“Were they together Tuesday night?”“Yes. Jack picked him up and took him to the club, I’m sure they sat at the same table. Paul can give you the names of the other eight sitting with them. This is all so crazy: How can they possibly think Jack’s guilty of anything? There must have been tons of people there that night.”“What’s Paul’s number?”“I don’t know. It’s got to be in the book. I’ll go look it up.”“Don’t worry about it. I can check that out in a bit. Once he confirms Jack’s alibi, it should go a long way.”Christie made a face. “‘Alibi.’ God, I can’t stand the word. Alibi implies you’re guilty and you’ve cooked up some story to cover your ass.”“Can I use your phone?”“I’d prefer it if you’d wait until Donovan or Bennet check in. I want to keep the line free until I hear from them. I hope you don’t mind.”“Not at all,” I said. “You mentioned the police picking up some items. Do you have any idea what they took?”She leaned her elbows on her knees and put her hands across her eyes. “They left a copy of the warrant and a list of items seized. I know it’s around here somewhere, but I haven’t seen it yet. Donovan went down to the pool house as soon as they left. He says they took a lot of sports equipment-golf clubs and baseball bats.”I winced, thinking of the impact of such items on the human skull. Switching the subject, I asked, “What about Bennet? Where was he that night?”“He went back to the restaurant he’s remodeling, to see what the workers had done that day. Construction’s been a nightmare and he spends a lot of time down there.”“Did anybody see him?”“You’d have to ask him,” she said. “Donovan and I were here. We’d had quite a lot to drink at dinner and I went straight to bed.” There was a marked tremor in the hand Christie was running through her hair.“Have you had anything to eat?”“I couldn’t touch a bite. I’m too anxious.”“Well, you ought to have something. Is Enid here yet?”“I think so.”“Let me check in the kitchen and have her make you a cup of tea. You should have a cookie or a piece of fruit. You look awful.”“I feel awful,” she said.I left her in the library and headed down the hall. I couldn’t believe I’d put myself on tea detail again, but simply being in the house made me tense. Any activity helped. Besides, I didn’t want to pass up the chance to talk to Enid if she was on the premises.“Me again,” I said when I entered the kitchen.She was standing at the island with a cutting board in front of her, smashing garlic with the blade of a Chinese cleaver. She was wrapped in a white apron with a white cotton scarf around her head, looking as round and as squeezable as a roll of toilet paper. While I watched, she laid down assorted sizes of unpeeled cloves, placed the wide blade on top of them, and pounded once with her fist. I could feel myself flinch. If the blade were angled incorrectly, she was going to end up whacking down on it with the outer aspect of her own hand, hacking straight to the bone. I stopped in my tracks. With her eyes pinned on me politely, she repeated the process, fist smashing down. She lifted the blade. Under it, the hapless garlic had been crushed like albino cockroaches, the peel sliding off with the flick of a knife tip.“I thought I’d fix Christie a cup of tea,” I said. “She needs something in her system-do you have a piece of fruit?”Enid pointed at the refrigerator. “There are grapes in there. Tea bags up in the cabinet. I’d do it myself, but I’m trying to get this sauce under way. If you set up a tray, I’ll take it in to her.”“No problem. You go right ahead.”She leaned to her left and slid open a compartment in which the trays were stored, pulling out a teak server with a rim around the edge. She placed it on the marble counter next to six big cans of crushed tomatoes, two cans of tomato paste, a basket of yellow onions, and a can of olive oil. On the stove top, I noticed a stainless steel stockpot.I moved over to the cabinet and removed a mug, pausing to fill the electric kettle as I’d seen Myrna do. I glanced at Enid casually. “You have paper napkins somewhere?”“Third drawer on the right.”I found the napkins and placed one, along with a teaspoon, on the tray. “I take it you heard about Jack’s arrest.”She nodded assent. “I was coming in the gate just as they were taking him away. I wish you could have seen the look on his face.”I shook my head regretfully, as if I gave a shit. “Poor thing,” I said. “It seems so unfair.” I hoped I hadn’t laid it on too thick, but I needn’t have worried.“The police were asking about his running shoes,” she said. “Something about a pattern on the soles-so there must have been bloody footprints in the bedroom where Guy was killed.”“Really,” I replied, trying to disguise my startlement. Apparently, she felt no reluctance about discussing the family’s business. I’d thought I’d have to be cunning, but she didn’t seem to share Myrna’s reservations about tattling. “They picked up the shoes yesterday?”“No. They called me this morning at home. Before I left for work.”“Lieutenant Robb?”“The other one. The woman. She’s a cold fish, I must say. I hope she’s not a friend of yours.”“I only met her this morning when I went in to be interviewed.”She flicked me a look as if taking my measure. “Myrna tells me you’re a detective. I’ve seen ’em on the TV of course, but I never met one in real life.”“Now you have,” I said. “In fact, I work in the same firm as Jack’s attorney, Lonnie Kingman. He’s on his way over to the station house to talk to Jack.” I was anxious to press her on the matter of the shoes, but worried she would clam up if I seemed too intent.She dropped her eyes to her work. She was tapping the Chinese cleaver in a rapid little dance that reduced all the garlic to the size of rice grains. “They searched for the shoes all day yesterday. You’ve never seen anything like it. Going through all the closets and trash cans, digging in the flowerbeds.”I made a little mouth noise of interest. It was clear Enid had an avid interest in all the trappings of police work.She said, “They told me I was actually the one who put ’em on the right track. Of course, I had no idea the shoes would turn out to be Jack’s. I feel terrible about that. Myrna’s beside herself. She feels so guilty about mentioning the quarrel.”“It must have been a shock about the shoes,” I prodded.“Jack’s my favorite among the boys. I came to work here twenty-five years ago. This was my first job and I didn’t expect to stay long.”“You were hired as a nanny?”“The boys were too old for that. I was more like a companion for Mrs. Malek,” she said. “I never trained as a cook. I simply learned as I went along. Mrs. Malek-Rona-was beginning to fail and she was in and out of the hospital all the time back then. Mr. Malek needed someone to run the house in her absence. Jack was in junior high school and he was pretty much at loose ends. He used to sit out in the kitchen with me, hardly saying a word. I’d bake a batch of cookies and he’d eat a whole plate just as fast as he could. He was really like a little kid. I knew what he was hungry for was his mother’s praise and attention, but she was much too sick. I did what I could, but it nearly broke my heart.”“And Guy was how old?”She shrugged. “Eighteen, nineteen. He’d already given them years of aggravation and grief. I never saw anything like him for the trouble he made. It was one scrape after another.”“How did he and Jack get along?”“I think Jack admired and romanticized him. They didn’t pal around together, but there was always a certain amount of hero worship. Jack thought Guy was like James Dean, rebellious and tragic, you know, misunderstood. They never had all that much to do with one another, but I can remember how Jack used to look at him. Now, Bennet and Jack, they were close. The two younger boys tended to gravitate to one another. I never had much use for Bennet. Something sneaky about him.”“What about Donovan?”“He was the smartest of the four. Even then he had a good head for business, always calculating the odds. When I first came to work, he’d already been off to college and was planning to come back and work for his dad full-time. Donovan loves that company more than any man alive. As for Guy, he was the troublemaker. That seemed to be his role.”“You really think Jack might have been involved in Guy’s death?”“I hate to believe it but I know he felt Guy broke faith with him. Jack’s a fanatic about loyalty. He always was.”“Well, that’s interesting,” I said. “Because the first time I was here, he said much the same thing. He was off at college when Guy left, wasn’t he?”Enid was shaking her head. “That wouldn’t have mattered. Not to him. Somehow, in Jack’s mind, when Guy went off on his great adventure, he should have taken him along.”“So he saw Guy’s departure as betrayal.”“Well, of course he did. Jack’s terribly dependent. He’s never had a job. He’s never even had a girl. He has no self-esteem to speak of and for that, I blame his dad. Bader never took the time to teach them they were worth anything. I mean, look at the reality. None of them has ever left home.”“It couldn’t be healthy.”“It’s disgraceful. Grown men?” She opened the can of olive oil and poured a short stream in the stockpot while she turned up the flame. She moved the cutting board from the counter and balanced the edge of it on the pot, sliding garlic across the surface. The sound of sizzling arose, followed moments later by a cloud of garlic-scented steam.“What’s the story on the shoes? Where did they turn up?”She paused to adjust the flame and then returned the board to the counter, where she picked up an onion. The peeling was as fragile as paper, crackling slightly as she worked. “At the bottom of a box. You remember the cartons of Bader’s clothing Christie packed away? They were sitting on the front porch. The Thrift Store Industries truck stopped by for an early-morning pickup first thing yesterday.”“Before the body was discovered?”“Before anyone was even up. I don’t know how I connected it. I saw the receipt lying on the counter and didn’t think much about it.. Later, it occurred to me-if the shoes weren’t on the premises, they must be somewhere else.”“How’d you figure out where they were?”“Well, that’s just it. I was loading the dishwasher, you know, humming a little tune and boom, I just knew.”“I’ve done the same thing. It’s almost like the mind makes an independent leap.”Enid flashed me a look. “Exactly. He must have realized he left a shoe print on the carpeting upstairs.”“Did you see it yourself?”“No, but Myrna says she saw it when she went in Guy’s room.” She paused, shaking her head. “I don’t want to think he did it.”“It is hard to believe,” I said. “I mean, in essence, he must have killed Guy, seen the footprint, slipped off his shoes and shoved them in the box on his way out of the house. He was lucky-or thought he was.”“You don’t sound convinced.”“I just have trouble with the notion. Jack doesn’t strike me as that decisive or quick. Doesn’t that bother you?”She thought about that briefly and then gave a shrug of dismissal. “A killer would have to depend on luck, I guess. You can’t plan for everything. You’d have to ad-lib.”“Well, it backfired in this case.”“If he did it,” she said. She picked up a can and tilted it into the electric opener. She pressed a lever and watched as the can went round and round, rotating blades neatly separating the lid from the can. Kitchens are dangerous, I thought idly as I looked on. What an arsenal-knives and fire and all that kitchen twine, skewers, meat pounders, and rolling pins. The average woman must spend a fair portion of her time happily contemplating the tools of her trade: devices that crush, pulverize, grind, and puree; utensils that pierce, slice, dissect, and debone; not to mention the household products that, once ingested, are capable of eradicating human life along with germs.Her eyes came up to mine. “Do you believe in ghosts?”“No, of course not. What makes you ask?”She glanced toward the corner of the kitchen where I noticed, for the first time, a staircase. “Yesterday I went upstairs to put some linens away. There was a Presence in the hall. I wondered if you believed in them.”I shook my head in the negative, remembering the chill in the air and the roaring in my ears.“This one smells of animal, something damp and unclean. It’s very strange,” she said.
