---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "M Is for Malice - index_split_006.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - M Is for Malice"
tags: ["said", "like", "know", "back", "one", "could", "well", "guy", "took", "get", "come", "much", "right", "would", "sure", "town", "looked", "look", "mine", "school", "church", "thought", "road", "take", "hour"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/MIsforMalice-indexsplit006html

---


Unknown
FIVEI glanced at my watch. Since there was nothing on my schedule, I thought I might as well hit the road. It was just now nine-thirty. A round-trip to Marcella would take a little more than an hour each way. If I allowed myself an hour to track down Guy Malek, I’d still have plenty of time left to grab a quick lunch and be back mid-afternoon. I opened my bottom desk drawer and took out my map of California. According to the legend, Marcella was maybe eighty miles north, with a population of less than fifteen hundred souls. I didn’t think it would take even an hour to locate him once I hit town, assuming he was still there. The conversation itself probably wouldn’t take more than thirty minutes, which meant I might get this whole job wrapped up by the end of the day.I put a call through to Dietz and let him know what was going on. I could hear the television in the background, one of the perpetual news broadcasts riddled with commercials. At the end of the hour, you know more about dog food than you do about world events. Dietz indicated that he had no particular plans. I wasn’t sure if he was angling for an invitation to accompany me, but since he didn’t ask the question, I didn’t answer it. I didn’t want to feel responsible for his entertainment anyway. I told him I expected to be back by three and would bypass the office and come straight home. We could figure out what to do about dinner when I finally rolled in.I gassed up my VW and headed north on 101. The sunshine was short-lived. Where the highway hugged the coastline, the fog had rolled in and the sky was now milky white with clouds turning thick at the edge. Along the road, the evergreens stood out against the horizon in a variety of dark shapes. Traffic moved steadily, mostly single-passenger cars with an occasional horse van, probably heading to the Santa Ynez valley just north of us. We hadn’t had much rain and the hills looked like dull hay-colored mounds with an occasional oil rig genuflecting in a series of obsequious bows toward the earth.The road turned inland and within the hour, the clouds had burned off again, fading back into a sky of pale blue, streaked with a residual haze as wispy as goose down. Just outside Santa Maria, I took 166 east and drove for ten miles on the two-lane road that paralleled the Cuyama River. The heat from the January sun was thin up here. Through the valleys and canyons, the earth smelled dry and a string of bald brown hills rose up in front of me. Rain had been promised, but the weather seemed to flirt, teasing us with high clouds and a hint of a breeze.The town of Marcella was situated in the shadow of the Los Coches Mountain. Driving, I was aware of the unseen presence of the great San Andreas Fault, the 750-mile fracture that snakes up the California coastline from the Mexican border to the triple junction near Mendocino, the Pacific and North American plates grinding against each other since time began. Under the thin layers of granite and marine sediment, the crust of the earth was as cracked as a skull. In this area, the San Andreas Fault was intersected by the Santa Ynez Fault with the White Wolf and the Garlock not far away. It’s speculated that the mountains in this part of the state once ran north-south like other mountains along the coast. According to theory, the southern tip of this chain was snagged by the Pacific plate many millions of years ago and dragged sideways as it passed, thus shifting the range to its current east-west orientation. I’d been driving my car once during a minor quake and it felt like the VW had suddenly been passed by a fast-moving eighteen-wheeler. There was a lurch to the right, as if the car had been sucked into a sudden vacuum. In California, where the weather seems to change so little, we look to earthquakes for the drama that tornadoes and hurricanes provide elsewhere.At the junction of two roads, I caught sight of a discreet sign and turned southward into the town of Marcella. The streets were six lanes wide and sparsely traveled. An occasional palm or juniper had been planted near the curb. There were no buildings over two stories high and the structures I saw consisted of a general store with iron bars across the front windows, a hotel, three motels, a real estate office, and a large Victorian house surrounded by scaffolding. The only bar was located in a building that looked like it might have been a post office once, stripped now of any official function: A Budweiser sign was hanging in a window. What did the citizens of Marcella do for a living, and why settle here? There wasn’t another town for miles and the businesses in this one seemed weighted toward drinking beer and going to bed soon afterward. If you wanted fast food or auto parts, if you needed a prescription filled, a movie, a fitness center, or a wedding gown, you’d have to drive into Santa Maria or farther north on 101 to Atascadero and Paso Robles. The land surrounding the town seemed barren. I hadn’t seen anything that even halfway resembled a citrus orchard or a plowed field. Maybe the countryside was devoted to ranches or mines or stock-car races. Maybe people lived here to escape the burly-burly of San Luis Obispo.I found a gas station on a side street and stopped for directions. The youth who emerged was about seventeen. He was skinny, had pale eyes, hair shaved very close up to his ears, and a tangle of teeth, all reminiscent of someone in an early episode of The Twilight Zone. I said, “Hi. I’m looking for a friend of mine named Guy Malek. I think he lives on Route 1 somewhere, but he didn’t give me directions.” Well, okay. I was fudging, but I didn’t outright lie. I would be Guy’s friend when he heard the news about the five million bucks.The youth said nothing, but he pointed a trembling finger like the Ghost of Christmas Past.I glanced over my shoulder. “Back that way?”“That’s the house.”I turned to stare with astonishment. The property was enclosed by chain-link fencing. Beyond a rolling chicken wire gate, I could see a small house, a shed, a large barn with corrugated metal siding curling away from the seams, an old yellow school bus, a single gas pump, and a sign too faded to read at any distance. The gate was open. “Oh. Well, thanks. Do you know if he’s home?”“No.”“He’s not?”“No, I don’t know. I didn’t see him today.”“Ah. Well, I guess I’ll go knock.”“You could do that,” he said.I pulled out of the station and drove across the road. I nosed the VW through the open gate and parked on a length of raw dirt that I took for a driveway. I got out. The surface of the yard was white sand with a rim of brown grass around the edge. The house was frame, painted once-upon-a-time white, one story with a wooden porch built across the front. A trellis that shielded the windows on the left sported only one bare vine, which twisted through the latticework like a boa constrictor. A matching trellis on the right had collapsed under its burden of dry, brown vegetation. Various wires extended from the roofline, connecting the occupants to telephone, cable, and electricity.I climbed the wooden stairs and knocked on the dilapidated screen. The front door was shut and there were no signs of life. There was a fine dusting of soot everywhere, as if the structure were downwind of a smelting plant. The porch floor began to tremble in a way that suggested that someone was traversing the wooden floor inside of the house. The door was opened and I found myself face-to-face with the man I took to be Guy Malek. Aside from a three-day growth of beard, he didn’t look anywhere near his age. His hair looked darker and straighter than it had in his high school yearbook, but his features were still boyish: khaki green eyes fringed with dark lashes; a small, straight nose; and a generous mouth. His complexion was clear and his color was good. Age had sketched in fine lines around his eyes and the flesh along his jaw was beginning to sag, but I’d have pegged him in his mid-thirties. At fifty and sixty, he’d no doubt look just the same, the years making only moderate adjustments to his good looks. He wore denim overalls on top of what looked like a union suit. He was in the process of putting on a blue jeans jacket when he answered the door, and he paused to straighten the collar in the back before he said, “Hey.”As an adolescent, Guy Malek had been as dorky looking as the rest of us. He was the bad kid, lawless and self-destructive, one of life’s lost souls. He must have been appealing because he was so in need of rescue. Women can’t resist a man who needs saving. Now his good angel had apparently taken up residence, bestowing on his countenance the look of serenity. It seemed odd that his brothers had matured so differently. Already, I liked this man better than his siblings. Aside from the scruffiness, he didn’t look like he was snorting, sniffing, or mainlining illegal substances.“Are you Guy Malek?”His smile was hesitant, as though I might be someone he had met before whose name he wished he remembered. “Yes.”“My name is Kinsey Millhone. I’m a private investigator from Santa Teresa.” I gave him a business card. He studied the card, but didn’t offer to shake hands. His were as soiled as an auto mechanic’s. I could see a muscle work in his jaw.His eyes came up to mine and his entire body became still. The smile faded. “My family hired you?”“Well, yes,” I said. I was about to launch into a diplomatic account of his father’s death when I saw, tears rise in his eyes, blurring the clear green of his gaze. He looked upward, blinking, and took a deep-breath before he brought his attention back to mine. He dashed at his cheeks, laughing with embarrassment.He said, “Whoa,” pinching at his eyes with the fingers of one hand. He shook his head, trying to compose himself. “Sorry. You caught me by surprise. I never thought it would matter, but I guess it does. I always wished they’d send someone, but I’d about given up hope. How’d you find me?”“It wasn’t that hard. I ran a DMV check and came up with your California identification card. I tried directory assistance, but they didn’t have you listed. I take it you don’t have a phone.”“Can’t afford one,” he said. “You want to come in?” His manner was awkward and he seemed unsure of himself. His gaze fell away from mine and then came back again.“I’d like that,” I said.He stepped back to allow me entrance and I passed into a room that was about what you’d expect. The interior construction was crude and featured-wide, unfinished floorboards and windows that didn’t quite shut. Various pieces of old furniture had been moved into the space, probably cadged from the city dump... if there was one in this town. Every surface was piled high with soiled clothes and books and magazines and utensils, pots and pans and canned goods and tools. There were also what looked like farm implements whose functions were unclear. There was a tower of used tires in one corner of the room and a toilet that didn’t seem connected to much of anything. Guy caught my puzzlement. “I’m holding that for a fellow. I have a real bathroom in there,” he said, smiling shyly.“Glad to hear that,” I said and smiled back at him.“You want a cup of coffee? It’s instant, but it’s not bad.”“No, thanks. Were you on your way out?”“What? Oh, yeah, but don’t worry about that. I have to be someplace shortly. Have a seat.” He pulled out a handkerchief and paused to blow his nose. I could feel anxiety stir in my chest. There was something touching about his openness. He gestured toward a frayed, lumpy couch with a spring sticking through the cushion. I perched on the edge, hoping not to do serious damage to my private parts. My discomfort was related to the fact that Guy Malek apparently thought his family had hired me to conduct the search out of sentiment. I knew their real attitude, which was actually hostile if the truth be known. I did a quick debate with myself and decided I’d better level with him. Whatever the outcome of our conversation, it would be too humiliating for him if I let him harbor the wrong impression.He pulled up a wooden chair and sat facing me directly, occasionally mopping at his eyes. He didn’t apologize for the tears that continued to spill down his cheeks. “You don’t know how hard I prayed for this,” he said, mouth trembling. He looked down at his hands and began to fold the handkerchief in on itself. “The pastor of my church... he swore up and down it would come to pass if it was meant to be. No point in praying, if it isn’t God’s will, he said. And I kept saying, ‘Man, it seems like they’d have found me by now if they cared enough, you know?’ “I was struck by the fact that his circumstances were oddly reminiscent of mine, both of us trying to assimilate fractured family connections. At least he welcomed his, though he’d misunderstood the purpose of my visit. I felt like a dog having to set him straight. “Guy, as a matter of fact, it’s more complicated. I have some bad news,” I said.“My father died?”“Two weeks ago. I’m not sure of the date. I gather he’d had a stroke and he was also struggling with cancer. He’d been through a lot and I guess his body just gave up on him.”He was silent for a moment, staring off into space. “Well. I guess I’m not surprised,” he said. “Did he... do you know if he was the one who asked for me?”“I have no idea. I wasn’t hired until yesterday. The probate attorney is getting the process underway. By law, you’re required to be notified since you’re one of the beneficiaries.”He turned to me, suddenly getting it. “Ah. You’re here on official business and that’s all it is, right?”“More or less.”I watched as the color rose slowly in his cheeks. “Silly me,” he said. “And here I thought you were sent by someone who actually gave a shit.”“I’m sorry.”“Not your fault,” he said. “What else?”“What else?”“I’m wondering if you have any other news to impart.”“Not really.” If he’d picked up on the fact that he was due to inherit money, he gave no indication.“I don’t suppose there’s any chance my father asked for me.”“I wish I could help, but I wasn’t given any details. It’s possible, I’m sure, but you may never know. You can ask the attorney when you talk to her. She knows a lot more than I do about the circumstances of his death.”He smiled fleetingly. “Dad hired a woman? That doesn’t sound like him.”“Donovan hired her. She went to school with his wife.”“What about Bennet and Jack? Are they married?” He said the names as if the sounds hadn’t been uttered for years.“No. Just Donovan. I don’t think he and Christie have any kids as yet. He runs the company, which I understand is now the third-largest construction firm in the state.”“Good for him. Donnie was always obsessed with the business,” he said. “Did you talk to the other two?”“Briefly.”The character of his expression had completely changed as we spoke. What had started out as happiness had shifted to painful enlightenment. “Correct me if I’m wrong, but I get the impression they’re not really interested in me. The attorney said they had to do this so they’re doing it. Is that it? I mean, the three of them aren’t burdened by a lot of warm, gooey feelings where I’m concerned.”“That’s true, but it probably stems from the situation when you left. I was told you were in a lot of trouble, so their memories of you aren’t that flattering.”“I suppose not. Nor mine of them if it comes right down to it.”“Besides, nobody really believed I’d find you. It’s been what, eighteen years?”“About that. Not long enough, apparently, from their perspective.”“Where’d you go when you left? Do you mind if I ask?”“Why would I mind? It doesn’t amount to much. I went out to the highway to hitch a ride. I was heading for San Francisco, zonked out of my head on acid. The fellow who picked me up was a preacher, who’d been hired by a church about a mile from here. He took me in. I was tripped out so bad I didn’t even know where I was at.”“And you’ve been here all this time?”“Not quite,” he said. “It wasn’t like I cleaned up and got straight, just like that. I screwed up more than once. I’d backslide... you know, get drunk and take off... but Pete and his wife always found me and brought me back. Finally, I realized I wasn’t going to shake ’em off. Didn’t matter what I did. They were sticking to me like glue. That’s when I took a stand and found Jesus in my heart. It really turned my life around.”“And you never got in touch with your family?” I said.He shook his head, his smile bitter. “They haven’t exactly been clamoring for me, either.”“Maybe that will change when I talk to them. What else can I tell them? Do you work?”“Sure, I work. I do maintenance at the church and, you know, general handyman jobs around town. Painting and repairs, plumbing, electrical. About anything you need. Mostly minimum wage, but I’m the only one does it, so I stay busy.”“Sounds like you’ve done all right for yourself.”He looked around him. “Well, I don’t have much, but I don’t need much either. Place isn’t mine,” he said. “The church provides my housing, but I make enough to take care of the basics. Food and utilities, that sort of thing. I don’t drive, but I have a bike and that gets me most places in a town this size.”“You’ve changed quite a lot.”“I’d be dead otherwise.” He glanced at his watch. “Listen, I don’t mean to rush you, but I probably ought to get myself on over to the church.”“I won’t keep you then. I appreciate your time. Can I give you a lift?”“Sure. We can talk on the way.”Once in the car, he directed me back to the highway. We turned right onto 166, heading east again. We drove for a while in companionable silence. He slid a look in my direction. “So what’s your assignment? Find me and report back?”“That’s about it,” I said. “Now that we have a current address, Tasha Howard, the attorney, will be sending you notice of the probate.”“Oh, that’s right. I forgot. I’m a beneficiary, you said.” His tone had turned light and nearly mocking.“That doesn’t interest you?”“Not particularly. I thought I needed something from those people, but as it turns out, I don’t.” He pointed at an upcoming junction and I took a right-hand turn onto a small side road. The roadbed had been downgraded from blacktop to loose gravel, and I could see the plumes of white dust swirling up in my rear window as we drove. The church was situated at the edge of a pasture about a half mile down. The sign said: JUBILEE EVANGELICAL CHURCH.“You can pull up right here,” he said. “You want to come in and see the place? If you’re paid by the hour, you might as well have the full tour. I’m sure Donnie can afford it.”I hesitated slightly. “All right.”He cocked his head. “You don’t have to worry. I won’t try to convert you.”I parked and the two of us got out. He didn’t issue a proclamation, but I could tell from his manner that he was proud of the place. He took out a ring of keys and let us in.The church was small, a frame building, little more than one room. There was something about its plain appearance that spoke of goodness. The stained glass windows were not elaborate. Each was divided into six simple panels of pale gold with a scripture written across the bottom. There was an unadorned wood pulpit at the front, positioned to the left of a raised and carpeted platform. On the right, there was an organ and three rows of folding chairs for the choir. Last Sunday’s flowers consisted of a spray of white gladioli. “Place was destroyed by fire about ten years back. Congregation rebuilt everything from the ground right on up.”I said, “How’d you get on track? That must have been hard.”He sat down in one of the front pews and I could see him look around, perhaps seeing the place as I saw it. “I give credit to the Lord, though Pete always says I did the work myself,” he said. “I grew up without much guidance, without values of any kind. I’m not blaming anybody. That’s just how it was. My parents were good people. They didn’t drink or beat me or anything like that, but they never talked about God or faith or their religious beliefs, assuming they had any, which I don’t guess they did. My brothers and I... even when we were little kids... never went to Sunday school or church.”“My parents disliked ‘organized religion.’ I don’t know what that phrase meant to them or what their perception was, but they took pride in making sure none of us were ever exposed to it. Like a disease of some kind. I remember they had a book by this guy named Philip Wylie. Generation o f Vipers. He equated the church teachings with intellectual corruption, the stunting of young minds.”“Some people feel that way,” I said.“Yeah, I know. I don’t get it, but it’s something I run into out there in the world. It’s like people think just because you go to church you’re not all that bright. I mean, just because I’m born-again doesn’t mean I lost IQ points.”“I’m sure you didn’t.”“Thing is, I was raised without a moral compass. I couldn’t get a sense of what the rules were so I just kept pushing. I kept crossing the line, waiting for somebody to tell me where the boundaries were.”“But you were getting into trouble with the law from what I heard. You must have known the rules because every time you broke one, you ended up in court. Donovan says you spent more time in juvenile Hall than you did at home.”His smile was sheepish. “That’s true, but here’s what’s weird. I didn’t mind Juvie all that much. At least I could be with kids as screwed up as I was. Man, I was out of control. I ran wild. I was a maniac, freaked out about everything. It’s hard to think about that now. I have trouble relating to myself and who I was back then. I know what happened. I mean, I know what I did, but I can’t imagine doing it. I wanted to feel good. I’ve thought about this a lot and that’s the best explanation I’ve been able to come up with. I felt bad and I wanted to feel better. Seemed to, me dope was the quickest way to get there. I haven’t touched drugs or hard liquor for more than fifteen years. I might have a beer now and then, but I don’t smoke, don’t play cards, don’t ballroom dance. Don’t take the Lord’s name in vain and don’t cuss... all that much. Stub my toe and I can turn the air blue, but most of the time, I avoid swear words.”“Well, that’s good.”“For me, it is. Back then, I was always teetering on the brink. I think I was hoping my parents would finally draw the line and mean it. That they’d say, ‘Here, this is it. You’ve finally gone and done it this time.’ But you know what? My dad was too soft. He waffled on everything. Even when he kicked my ass from here to next Tuesday, even when he threw me out of the house, he was saying, ‘Give this some thought, son. You can come back when you’ve figured it out.’ But like what? Figured what out? I didn’t have a clue. I was rudderless. I was like a boat going full throttle but without any real direction, roaring around in big circles. Know what I mean?”“Sure I do. In high school, I was a screw-up myself. I ended up as a cop before I did this.”He smiled. “No kidding? You drank and smoked dope?”“Among other things,” I said, modestly.“Come on. Like what?”“I don’t know. Kids in my class were all clean-cut, but not me. I was a wild thing. I ditched school. I hung out with some low-life dudes and I liked that. I liked them,” I said. “I was the odd one out and so were they, I guess.”“Where’d you go to high school?”“Santa Teresa High.”He laughed. “You were a low-waller?”“Absolutely,” I said. Low-wallers were the kids who quite literally perched on a low wall that ran along the back of the school property. Much smoking of cigarettes, funky clothes, and peroxided hair.Guy laughed. “Well, that’s great.”“I don’t know how great it was, but it’s what I did.”“How’d you get on track?”“Who says I am?”He got to his feet as if he’d come to a decision.“Come on out to the parsonage and meet Peter and Winnie,” he said. “They’ll be in the kitchen at this hour setting up supper for the Thursday night Bible study.”I followed him up the center aisle and through a door at the rear. I could feel the first stirrings of resistance. I didn’t want anyone pushing me to convert. Too much virtue is just as worrisome as wickedness in my book.
