---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "M Is for Malice - index_split_004.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - M Is for Malice"
tags: ["could", "guy", "like", "said", "donovan", "left", "time", "never", "would", "back", "bennet", "year", "one", "dad", "heard", "well", "might", "know", "probably", "came", "look", "much", "name", "say", "day"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/MIsforMalice-indexsplit004html

---


Unknown
THREEI stopped by the office and opened a file on the case, recording the data Donovan had given me. It didn’t look like much, the merest scrap of information, but the date of birth and Social Security number would be invaluable as personal identifiers. If pressed, I could always check with Guy Malek’s former high school classmates to see if anybody’d heard from him in the years since he left. Given his history of bad behavior, he didn’t seem like a kid others would have known well or perhaps cared to have known at all, but he might have had confederates. I made a note of the name Donovan had given me. Paul Trasatti might provide a lead. It was possible Guy had turned respectable in the last decade and a half and might well have come back to his reunions from time to time. Often the biggest “losers” in high school are the most eager to flaunt their later successes.If I had to make an educated guess about his original destination on the road to exile, I’d have to say San Francisco, which was only six hours north by car, or an hour by plane. Guy left Santa Teresa when the Haight Ashbury was at its peak. Any flower child who wasn’t already brain-dead from drugs had gravitated to the Haight in those days. It was the party to end all parties, and with ten grand in his pocket his invitation would have been engraved.At three-thirty, I locked up my office and went down to the second floor to pick up instructions for service on the two deposition subpoenas. I retrieved my car and headed to the Maleks’ place. The house was at the end of a narrow lane, the fifteen-acre property surrounded by an eight-foot wall intersected by an occasional wooden gate. I’d grown up in this town and I thought I knew every corner of it; but this was new to me, prime Santa Teresa real estate dating back to the thirties. The Maleks must lay claim to the last section of flat land for miles. The rear portions of the property must have tilted straight uphill because the face of the Santa Ynez Mountains loomed above me, looking close enough to touch. From the road., I could pick out individual patches of purple sage and coyote brush.The iron gates at the entrance to the property stood open. I followed the long, curved driveway past a cracked and neglected tennis court into a cobblestone turnaround tucked into the L of the main residence. Both the house and the wall that encompassed the grounds were faced with dusky terra-cotta stucco, an odd shade of red halfway between brick and dusty rose. Massive evergreens towered above the grounds and a forest of live oaks stretched out to the right of the house as far as the eye could see. Sunlight scarcely penetrated the canopy of branches. Near the front of the house, the pine trees had dropped a blanket of needles that must have turned the soil to acid. There was little if any grass and the damp smell of bare earth was pervasive. Here and there, a shaggy palm tree asserted its spare presence. I could see several outbuildings to the right-a bungalow, a gardener’s shed, a greenhouse-and on the left, a long line of garages. The driveway apparently continued on around the rear of the house. A Harley-Davidson was parked op a gravel pad to one side. There were flowerbeds, but even the occasional suggestion of color failed to soften the somber gloom of the mansion and the deep shade surrounding it.The architectural style of the house was Mediterranean. All of the windows were flanked with shutters. A series of balustrades punctuated the stark lines of the facade and a lovers’ stairway curved up along the left to a second-story veranda. All the trim was done in dark green, the paint color chalky with age. The roof was composed of old red tile, mottled with soft green algae. The poured concrete urns on either side of the front door were planted with perennials that had died back to sticks. The door itself looked like something that had been lifted from one of the early California missions. When I pressed the bell, I could hear a single resonating note strike within, tolling my presence to the occupants.In due course, the door was opened by a white woman of indeterminant age in a gray cotton uniform. She was of medium height, thick through the middle, her shoulders and breasts slumping toward a waist that had expanded to accommodate the gradual accumulation of weight. I pegged her in her early forties, but I couldn’t be sure.“Yes?” Her eyebrows needed plucking and her blond hair showed dark roots mixed with gray. This was a woman who apparently whacked at her own hair with some kind of dull instrument, a not unfamiliar concept. Her bangs had been cut slightly too short, curling across her forehead unbecomingly. Maybe forty dollars for a haircut wasn’t too much to pay.I handed her my business card. “Are you Myrna?”“That’s right.”“I’m Kinsey Millhone,” I said. “I believe Donovan called to say I’d be stopping by this afternoon. Is Bennet at home?”Her expression didn’t change, but she seemed to know what I was talking about. She was plain, her nose maybe half a size too big for her face. Her lips were antiqued with the remnants of dark lipstick, probably eaten off at lunch or imprinted on the edge of her coffee cup. Now that I’d become an aficionado of drugstore cosmetics, I was acting like an expert. What a laugh, I thought.“He just got in. He said to put you in the library if you arrived before he came down. Would you like to follow me?”I said, “Sure.” I loved the idea of being “put” in the library, like a potted plant.I followed her across the foyer, toward a room on the right. I took in my surroundings surreptitiously, trying not to look like a mouth breather in the process. In the homes of the rich, it doesn’t do to gape. The floor was dark parquet, a complicated herringbone pattern with the polished wooden chevrons blending together seamlessly. The entrance hall was two stories high, but little if any light filtered down from above. Tapestries were hung along the walls at intervals, faded depictions of women with high waists and faces shaped like hard-boiled eggs. Gents in cloaks rode on horseback, trailed by hunting dogs on chains. Behind them, a merry band of woodcutters toted a dead stag that had spears sticking out of its torso like Saint Sebastian. I could tell right away that theirs was a world devoid of animal-rights activists.The library had the look of a private men’s club, or what I imagine such a place would look like if women were allowed in. Several large red Oriental carpets had been laid side by side to form a continuous floor covering. One wall was paneled in dark walnut and there were floor-to-ceiling bookshelves on the other three. The windows were tall and narrow, diamonds of leaded glass admitting more chill air than afternoon light. There were three groupings of ripped red-leather club chairs and an enormous gray stone fireplace with a gas starter, its inner hearth blackened by countless fires. The room smelled of charred oak and book mold and suggested the kind of dampness associated with poorly laid foundations. For a family that had amassed a fortune in the construction business, they really ought to think about pumping money into the place. Failing major home improvements, a quick trip to Pier I would have done wonders.For once, left to my own devices, I didn’t bother to snoop. Guy Malek had been gone for eighteen years. I wasn’t going to find a copy of his outbound bus schedule or a drawer filled with personal diaries he’d kept as a lad. I heard someone walking on the second floor, the ceiling creaking as the steps passed from one side to the other of the room above. I circled the library, glancing out of every window I passed. The room was a good thirty feet long. At the far end, a solarium looked out on the rear lawn, a large expanse of dormant grass with a murky-looking koi pond in the center. The surface of the water was choked with lily pads.I moved back toward the door and heard someone come down the stairs and traverse the hall. The door opened and Bennet Malek came in. He was four years younger than Donovan with the same fair hair. Where Donovan’s was glossy, Bennet’s was coarse, and he kept it cut short to discourage a visible tendency to curl. He’d apparently given up his battle to stay clean shaven and a blond beard and mustache now defined the lower portion of his face. He was heavyset, looking beefy across the shoulders and thick through the chest. He wore jeans and a navy sweatshirt with the sleeves pushed up along forearms densely matted with hair. Tasha had tagged him as a man who invested and lost sums of money on various faulty commercial ventures. I wondered how I might have responded to him if I hadn’t been told in advance of his poor business sense. As it was, I found myself disregarding the hearty confidence he was at pains to project. Belatedly, I noticed that he carried the last half inch of a drink in his right hand, gin or vodka over ice with a twist. He set the drink on the end table closest to him.He held out his hand and shook mine with unnecessary strength. We weren’t about to arm wrestle so what was the point? His fingertips were icy and faintly moist to the touch. “Bennet Malek, Miss Millhone. Nice to meet you. Don said you’d be coming. Can I offer you a drink?” He had a big booming voice and made solid eye contact. Very manly, I thought.“Thanks, but I’m fine. I don’t want to take any more time than I have to. I know you’re busy.”“Fair enough. Why don’t you have a seat?” he said. His attentiveness seemed feigned, a salesman’s maneuver for putting the customer at ease. I’d been in this man’s company thirty seconds or less and I’d already developed an aversion to him.I perched on the edge of a club chair with a wide, sunken seat. The leather surface was slippery and I had to fight a tendency to skid backward into the depths. As a child, I used to polish the trailer park sliding board to lightning-fast speeds by vigorous rubbings with sheets of Cut-Rite waxed paper. The glossy leather cushion had the same slick feel to it. To avoid losing traction, I had to keep my weight pitched forward, feet together and flat on the floor.Bennet settled into the chair to my left with a series of creakings. “I understand you’re a private investigator,” he said.“That’s right. I’ve been licensed for ten years. I was a police officer before that. What about you? What sort of work do you do?”“I’m into venture capital. I look for promising little companies with cash-flow problems.”And drain them dry, no doubt. “Sounds like fun,” I remarked.“It’s gratifying. Let’s put. it that way.” His voice had dropped into a confidential tone. “I take it you met with Don?”“That’s right. I talked to him earlier this afternoon.”He shook his head almost imperceptibly. “Did he mention the missing will?”“Tasha told me about that when she was briefing me at lunch,” I said. Vaguely, I wondered why he was raising the subject. The existence of a second will was really not my concern. “I guess your brother lucked out,” I said.He snorted. “I’ll tell you what bugs me. I remember when Dad signed the second will. I can picture the day just as clear as I’m sitting here. Dad’s attorney and two witnesses came out to the house.”“Well, that’s interesting. Do you remember who they were?”“The witnesses? Two women. I remember that much. I assumed they worked for the attorney, but I may have made that up. They weren’t personal friends of Dad’s as far as I know. The four of them came in here and emerged maybe half an hour later.”“Have you told Tasha about this?”“I mentioned I was here the day the second will was signed. I can’t remember now if I mentioned witnesses or not.”“I’d tell her, if I were you. She may find a way to determine who they were. From what I’ve heard, no one disputes the fact that a second will was drawn up, but was it signed in your presence? Were you apprised of the provisions?”“Well, I wasn’t in the room with him if that’s what you’re getting at. Dad referred to it later, but he never spelled it out. The question is, what happened to it?”I shrugged. “Your father could have changed his mind. He could have torn it up and tossed it out.”Bennet stirred restlessly. “So everyone says, though I’m not convinced. It’s an interesting issue, if you think about it. I mean, look at the facts. The will comes up missing and the black sheep of the family makes out like a bandit. Dad signed it in March and Guy left within days.”“You’re saying your brother stole it?”“I’m saying, why not? I wouldn’t put it past him. He stole everything else.”“But what good would that do? Even if he snitched a copy, the attorney probably kept the original. Once Guy was gone, he had no way of knowing your father wasn’t going to turn around and make another will just like it. Or write a third will altogether. From what Donovan’s told me, your father was good at talking tough and not so good when it came to follow-through.”He shook his head and his expression was patronizing. “True enough. That’s why I’m going back through all of Dad’s personal papers. It’s not that we want to deny Guy any monies he may be entitled to, but this is bullshit in my opinion. He collected his share once. Dad had the second will drawn up with every intention of eliminating Guy’s claim. That’s why he gave him the cash to begin with-to pay him off in full. I heard him allude to it many times over the years. As far as he was concerned, the ten grand he gave my brother was the end of it.”“Well, I wish I could help, but this is really not my turf. Tasha’s the expert. I suggest you sit down and talk to her.”“What about my father’s deal with Guy?” he went on argumentatively. “It was a verbal agreement, but doesn’t that count for anything?”“Hey, you’re asking the wrong person. I have no idea. No one knows where Guy is, let alone what kind of bargain he made the day he left.”His smile flickered and I could see him curb a desire to continue arguing the point. “You’re right, of course,” he said. “So what can I tell you about Guy?”“Let’s start with the obvious. Did he say anything to you about his plans before he left?”“I’m afraid Guy wasn’t in the habit of discussing anything with me.”I shifted the subject slightly. “Could he have headed up to San Francisco? Donovan says he was into drugs in those days and the Haight might have been a draw.”“It’s always possible. If that’s where he went, he never said a word to me. I should probably warn you, the two of us weren’t close. I don’t mean to seem uncooperative, but I don’t have much to offer in the way of information.”“Did you ever hear him mention a possible career? Did he have any personal passions?”Bennet’s smile was thin. “He made a career out of doing as little as possible. His passion was getting into trouble, making life miserable for everyone else.”“What about his employment? What kind of jobs did he have?”“None significant. When he was still in his teens, he worked in a pizza place until he got caught skimming cash. He also got a job doing telephone sales. That lasted two days. I don’t remember his ever doing much else until he started working for Dad. He pumped gas for a while so I suppose he might have become a career gas station attendant. ““What kind of car did he drive?”“He drove the family Chevy until he was involved in a hit-and-run accident and his license was suspended. After that, Dad refused to let him use any of the family vehicles.”“Do you know if his license was ever reinstated?”“If it wasn’t, he probably drove without. He never cared much about life’s petty little rules and regulations.”“Did he have any hobbies?”“Not unless you count smoking dope and getting laid.”“What about his personal interests? Did he hunt, or fish? Did he skydive?” I was floundering, casting about in an attempt to develop a sense of direction.”Bennet shook his head. “He was a vegetarian. He said nothing should ever have to die so that he could eat. He was petrified of heights so I doubt he ever jumped out of airplanes or climbed mountains or bungee-jumped.”“Well at least we can eliminate that,” I said. “Did he have medical problems?”“Medical problems? Like what?”“I don’t know. I’m just trying to find ways to get a bead on him. Was he diabetic? Did he have allergies or any chronic illnesses?”“Oh I see what you’re getting at. No. As far as I know, his health was good-for someone so heavily into drink and drugs.”“Donovan says he had one good friend. Somebody named Paul?”“You’re talking about Paul Trasatti. I can give you his telephone number. He hasn’t gone anywhere.”“I’d appreciate that.”He recited the number off the top of his head and I made a quick note in the little spiral-bound notebook I carry.”I tried to think about the areas I hadn’t covered yet. “Was he a draft dodger? Did he protest the was in Vietnam?”“He didn’t have to. The army wouldn’t take him. He had bad feet. Lucky him. He never gave a shit about politics. He never even voted as far as I know.”“What about religion? Did he do Yoga? Meditate? Chant? Walk on hot coals?” This was like pulling teeth.He shook his head again. “None of the above.”“What about bank accounts?”“Nope. At least he didn’t have any back then.”“Did he own any stocks or bonds?”Bennet shook his head again. He was beginning to seem amused at my persistence, which I found irritating.“He must have cared about something,” I said.“He was a fuckup, pure and simple. He never lifted a finder for anyone except himself. Typical narcissist. The girls couldn’t get enough of him. You figure it out.”“Look, Bennet. I understand your hostility, but I can do without the editorializing. You must have cared about him once.”“Of course,” he said blandly, averting his gaze. “But that was before he became such a pain in the ass to all of us. Besides, he’s been gone for years. I suppose at some level I have some kind of family feeling, but it’s hard to sustain given his long absence.”“Once he left, none of you ever heard from him?”His eyes came back to mine. “I can only speak for myself. He never called me or wrote. If he was in touch with anyone else, I wasn’t told about it. Maybe Paul knows something.”“What sort of work does he do?”“He’s a rare-book dealer. He buys and sells autographs, letters, manuscripts. Things like that.” He closed his mouth and smiled faintly, volunteering nothing unless I asked point-blank.I wasn’t getting anywhere and it was probably time to move on. “What about Jack? Could Guy have confided in him?”“You can ask him yourself. He’s right out there,” Bennet said. He gestured toward the windows and I followed his gaze. I caught a glimpse of Jack as he crossed the back lawn, heading away from the house toward a slope to the left. The rear of the property picked up just enough sun to foster a mix of coarse, patchy grasses, some of which were dormant at this time of year. He had a couple of golf clubs tucked carelessly under one arm and he carried a bucket and a net in a blue plastic frame.By the time we caught up with him and Bennet had introduced us, Jack was using a sand wedge to smack golf balls at the net he’d set up twenty yards away. Bennet withdrew and left me to watch Jack practice his chipping shots. He’d swing and I could hear the thin whistle as the club cut through the air. There’d be a whack and the ball would arc toward the net, with an nerring accuracy. Occasionally, a shot would hit the grass nearby, landing with a short bounce, but most of the time he nailed the target he was aiming for.He wore a visor with PEBBLE BEACH imprinted on the rim. His hair was light brown, a shock of it protruding from the Velcro-secured opening at the back. He wore chinos and a golf shirt with the emblem for St. Andrew’s stitched on the front like a badge. He was leaner than his two brothers and his face and arms were tanned. I could see him measure the trajectory of the ball as it sailed through the air. He said, “I hope this doesn’t seem rude, but I’ve got a tournament coming up.”I murmured politely, not wanting to break his concentration.Whistle. Whack. “You’ve been hired to find Guy,” he said when the ball landed. He frowned to himself and adjusted his stance. “How’s it coming?”I smiled briefly. “So far all I have are his date of birth and his Social Security number.”“Why did Donovan tell you to talk to me?”“Why wouldn’t I talk to you?”He ignored me for the moment. I watched as he walked out to the net and leaned down, gathering the countless balls which he tossed in his plastic bucket. He came back to the spot where I was standing and started all over again. His swing looked exactly the same-time after time, without variation. Swing, whack, in the net. He’d put the next ball down. Swing, whack, in the net. He shook his head at one shot, responding to my comment belatedly. “Donovan doesn’t have much use for me. He’s a Puritan at heart. It’s all work, work, work with him. You have to be productive-get the job done. All that rah-rah-rah stuff. As far as he’s concerned, golf isn’t worthy of serious consideration unless it nets you an annual income of half a million bucks.” He paused to look at me, leaning lightly on his golf club, as if it were a cane. “I don’t have any idea where Guy went, if that’s what you’re here to ask. I was finishing my senior year at Wake Forest, so I heard about it by phone. Dad called and said he’d told Guy to hit the road. They’d had a quarrel about something and off he went.”“When was the last time you saw him?”“When I was home for Mother’s funeral in January. When I came home again for spring break, he’d been gone maybe three days. I figured the whole thing would blow over, but it never did. By the time I graduated and came home in June, the subject was never mentioned. It’s not like we were forbidden to refer to him. We just didn’t, I guess out of consideration for Dad.”“You never heard from Guy at all? Not a call or a postcard in all these years?”Jack shook his head.“Didn’t that bother you?”“Of course. I adored him. I saw him as a rebel, a true individual. I hated school and I was miserable. I did poorly in most classes. All I wanted was to play golf and I didn’t see why I had to have a college education. I would have gone off with Guy in a heartbeat if he’d told me what was going on. What can I tell you? He never called. He never wrote. He never gave any indication he gave a shit about me. Such is life.”“And nobody outside the family ever reported running into him?”“Like at a convention or something? You’re really scraping the bottom of the barrel on that one.”“You think you’d have heard something.”“Why? I mean, what’s the big deal? People probably pull this shit all the time. Go off, and nobody ever hears from them again. There’s no law says you have to stay in touch with people just because you’re related.”“Well, true,” I said, thinking of my own avoidance of relatives. “Do you know of anyone else who might help? Did he have a girlfriend?”Jack smiled mockingly. “Guy was the kind of fellow mothers warn their little girls about.”“Donovan told me women found him attractive, but I don’t get it. What was the appeal?”“They weren’t women. They were girls. Melodrama is seductive when you’re seventeen.”I thought about it briefly, but this seemed like another. dead end. “Well. If you have any ideas, could you get in touch?” I took a card from my handbag and passed it over to him.Jack glanced at my name. “How’s the last name pronounced?”“Mill-hone,” I said. “Accent on the first syllable. The last rhymes with bone.”He nodded. “Fair enough. You won’t hear from me, of course, but at least you can say you tried.” He smiled. “I’m sure Don was way too cool to mention this,” he said mildly, “but we’re all hoping you won’t find him. That way we can file a petition asking the court to declare him dead and his share can be divided among the three of us.”“That’s what ‘diligent search’ is all about, isn’t it? Tell Donovan I’ll call him in a day or two,” I said.I walked back across the grass toward the house. What a bunch, I thought. Behind me, I could hear the whistle of Jack’s swing and the sound of the clubhead on impact. I could have knocked at the front door again and asked the housekeeper if Donovan’s wife, Christie, was at home. As an old college chum of Tasha’s, she might at least be gracious. On the other hand, she wasn’t married to Donovan at the point when Guy departed, and I couldn’t believe she’d have anything of substance to contribute. So where did that leave me?I got in my car and started the engine, shifting into first. I eased down the long drive toward the street beyond. At the front gate, I paused, shifting into neutral and letting the car idle while I considered the possibilities. As nearly as I could tell, Guy Malek hadn’t been a property owner in Santa Teresa County, so there wasn’t any point in checking the tax rolls or real property records. From what his brothers had indicated, he’d never even rented his own apartment, which meant I couldn’t consult with a past landlord, or query the water, gas, electric, or phone companies for a forwarding address. Most of those records aren’t kept for eighteen years anyway. What else? At the time he’d left Santa Teresa, he had no job and no significant employment history, so there wasn’t any point in checking with the local labor unions or with Social Security. He didn’t vote, own a car or a gun, didn’t hunt or fish, which probably meant he didn’t have any permits or licenses on record. He’d probably acquired a driver’s license and a vehicle by now. Also, using past behavior as a future indicator, he probably had a criminal history in the system somewhere, certainly with the National Crime Information Center. Unfortunately, I didn’t have access to that information and, offhand, I couldn’t think of anyone who’d be willing to run a computer check. A law enforcement officer with proper authorization has all sorts of databases available that I couldn’t tap into as a licensed private eye.I put the VW in first gear, hung a left, and drove over to the Department of Motor Vehicles. It was just shy of closing time and the place was clearing out. I filled out a form, asking for a records’ search. Often, DMV records will be out of date. People move, but the change of address won’t show up in the DMV computers until a driver’s license or a vehicle registration is renewed. In this case, if Guy Malek had left the state, all the data might well be years out of date, if it showed up at all. At the moment, however, it seemed like the quickest way to get a preliminary fix on the situation. Since I didn’t have his driver’s license number, I picked up an ANI Multiple Record Request Form, filling in his full name and date of birth. The Automated Name Index file would either show no record for the criteria given, or would show a match for last name, first name, middle initial, and birthdate. As soon as I got back to the office, I’d put the form in the mail and ship it off to Sacramento. With luck, I could at least pick up his mailing address.In the meantime, since the office was nearly empty, I asked one of the DMV clearks to check the name through her computer.She turned and gave me her full attention. “Are you nuts? I could get fired for doing that,” she said. She turned the monitor on its swivel so I couldn’t peek at the screen.“I’m a PI,” I said.“You could be the Pope for all I care. You’ll have to wait to hear from Sacramento. You get nothing from me.”“It was worth a try,” I said. I tried a winsome smile, but it didn’t get me far.“You got a nerve,” she said. She turned away with a reproving shake of her head and began to pack away her desk.So much for my powers of persuasion.
