---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "M Is for Malice - index_split_003.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - M Is for Malice"
tags: ["said", "like", "got", "get", "back", "year", "time", "could", "across", "guy", "malek", "donovan", "want", "good", "one", "think", "high", "see", "way", "sure", "dad", "seemed", "left", "right", "around"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/MIsforMalice-indexsplit003html

---


Unknown
TWOI walked home along Cabana Boulevard. The skies had cleared and the air temperature hovered in the mid fifties. This was technically the dead of winter and the brazen California sunshine was not as warm as it seemed. Sunbathers littered the sand like the flotsam left behind by the high tide. Their striped umbrellas spoke of summer, yet the new year was just a week old. The sun was brittle along the water’s edge, fragmenting where the swells broke against the pilings under the wharf. The surf must have been dead cold, the salt water eye-stinging where children splashed through the waves and submerged themselves in the churning depths. I could hear their thin screams rising above the thunder of the surf, like thrill seekers on a rollercoaster, plunging into icy terror. On the beach, a wet dog barked at them and shook the water from his coat. Even from a distance I could see where his rough hair had separated into layers.I turned left onto Bay Street. Against the backdrop of evergreens, the profusion of bright pink and orange geraniums clashed with the magenta bougainvillea that tumbled across the fences in my neighborhood. Idly, I wondered where to begin the search for Guy Malek. He’d been gone for eighteen years and the prospects of running him to ground didn’t seem that rosy. A job of this kind requires ingenuity, patience; and systematic routine, but success sometimes hinges on pure luck and a touch of magic. Try billing a client on the basis of that.As soon as I got home, I washed off my makeup, I changed into Reeboks, and traded my blazer for a red sweatshirt. Downstairs in the kitchenette, I turned on the radio and tuned the station to the Elvis marathon, which was moving right along. I lip-synched the lyrics to “Jailhouse Rock,” doing a bump and grind around the living room. I pulled out a city map and spread it on my kitchen counter. I leaned on my elbows, backside still dancing while I located the street where the Maleks lived. Verdugo was a narrow lane tucked between two parallel roads descending from the mountains. This was not an area I knew well. I laid Donovan’s business card on the counter beside the map, reached for the wall phone, and dialed the number printed on the front.I was routed through the company receptionist to a secretary who told me Malek was out in the field but due back at the office momentarily. I gave my name and phone number, along with a brief explanation of, my business with him. She said she’d have him return the call. I’d just hung up when I heard a knock at the door. I opened the porthole and found myself face-to-face with Robert Dietz.I opened the front door. “Well, look who’s here,” I said. “It’s only been two years, four months, and ten days.”“Has it really been that long?” he asked mildly. “I just drove up from Los Angeles. Mind if I come in?”I stepped back and he moved past me. Elvis had launched into “Always On My Mind,” which, frankly, I didn’t need to hear just then. I reached over and turned off the radio. Dietz wore the same blue jeans, same cowboy boots, the same tweed sportscoat. I’d first seen him in this outfit, leaning against the wall in a hospital room where I was under observation after a hit man ran me off the road. He was two years older now, which probably put him at an even fifty, not a bad age for a man. His birthday was in November, a triple Scorpio for those who set any store by these things. We’d spent the last three months of our relationship in bed together when we weren’t up at the firing range doing Mozambique pistol drills. Romance between private eyes is a strange and wondrous thing. He looked slightly heavier, but that was because he’d quit smoking-assuming he was still off cigarettes.“You want some coffee?” I asked.“I’d love some. How are you? You look good. I like the haircut.”“Forty bucks. What a waste. I should have done it myself.” I put a pot of coffee together, using the homey activity to assess my emotional state. By and large, I didn’t feel much. I was happy to see him in the same way I’d be happy to see any friend of long standing, but aside from mild curiosity, there was no great rush of sexual chemistry. I felt no strong joy at his arrival or rage that he’d shown up unannounced. He was a man of impulse: impatient, restless, abrupt, reticent. He looked tired and his hair seemed much grayer, nearly ashen along his ears. He perched on one of my kitchen stools and leaned his forearms on the counter.I flipped on the coffeepot and put the bag of ground coffee back in the freezer. “How was Germany?”Dietz was a private eye from Carson City, Nevada, who’d developed an expertise in personal security. He left to go to Germany to run antiterrorist training exercises for overseas military bases. He said, “Good while it lasted. Then the funding dried up. These days, Uncle Sam doesn’t want to spend the bucks that way. I was bored with it anyway; middle-aged man crawling through the underbrush. I didn’t have to get out there with ’em, but I couldn’t resist.”“So what brings you back? Are you working a case?”“I’m on my way up the coast to see the boys in Santa Cruz.” Dietz had two sons with a common-law wife, a woman named Naomi who had steadfastly refused to marry him. His older son, Nick, was probably twenty by now. I wasn’t sure how old the younger boy was.“Ah. And how are they?”“Terrific. They’ve got papers due this week so I said I’d hold off until Saturday and then drive up. If they can get a few days off, I thought we’d take a little trip somewhere.”“I notice you’re limping. What’s that about?”He gave a pat to his left thigh. “Got a bum knee,” he said. “Tore the meniscus during night maneuvers, stumbling on a pothole. That’s the second time I’ve injured it and the docs say I need to have a knee replacement. I’m not interested in surgery, but I agreed to give the knee a rest. Besides, I’m in burnout. I need a change of scene.”“You were burned out before you left.”“Not burnout. I was bored. I guess neither one is cured by doing more of the same.” Dietz’s gray eyes were clear. He was a good-looking man in a very nonstandard way. “I thought I might stay on your couch for four days if you don’t object. I’m supposed to stay off my feet and put ice on my knee.”“Oh, really. That’s nice. You drop out of my life for two years and then you show up because you need a nurse? Forget that.”“I’m not asking you to make a fuss,” he said. “I figure you’re busy so you’ll be off at work all day. I’ll sit here and read or watch TV, minding my own business. I even brought my own ice bags to stick in the freezer. I don’t want anyone hovering. You won’t have to lift a finger.”“Don’t you think this is a tiny bit manipulative, springing it on me like this?”“It’s not manipulative as long as you have the option of saying no.”“Oh, right. And feel guilty? I don’t think so,” I said.“Why would you feel guilty? Turn me down if it doesn’t suit. What’s the matter with you? If we can’t tell the truth then what’s the point in a relationship? Do as you please. I can find a motel or I can drive on up the coast tonight. I thought it’d be nice to spend a little time together, but it’s not compulsory.”I regarded him warily. “I’ll think about it.” There was no point in telling him-since I was barely willing to admit it to myself-how flat the light had seemed in the days after he left, how anxiety had stirred every time I came home to the empty apartment, how music had seemed to whisper secret messages to me. Dance or decline. It didn’t seem to make any difference. I’d imagined his return a hundred times, but never this way. Now the flatness of it was inside and all of my past feelings for him had shifted from passionate involvement to mild interest, if that.Dietz had been watching me and his squint showed he was perplexed. “Are you mad about something?”“Not at all,” I said.“Yes, you are.”“No, I’m not.”“What are you so mad about?”“Would you stop that? I’m not mad.”He studied me for a moment and then his expression cleared. He said, “Ohhh, I get it. You’re mad because I left.”I could feel my cheeks brighten and I broke off eye contact. I lined up the salt and pepper shakers so their bases just touched. “I’m not mad because you left. I’m mad because you came back. I finally got used to being by myself and here you are again. So where does that put me?”“You said you liked to be alone.”“That’s right. What I don’t like is being taken up and then abandoned. I’m not a pet you can put in a kennel and retrieve at your convenience.”His smile faded. “‘Abandoned’? You weren’t abandoned. What’s that supposed to mean?”Just then the telephone rang, saving us from any further debate. Donovan Malek’s secretary said, “Miss Millhone? I have Mr. Malek on the line for you. Can you hold?”I said, “Sure.”Dietz mouthed Did not.I stuck my tongue out at him. I’m very mature that way.Donovan Malek came on the line and introduced himself. “Good afternoon, Miss Millhone...”“Call me Kinsey if you would.”“Thanks. It’s Donovan Malek here. I just spoke to Tasha Howard and she said she talked to you at lunch. I take it she filled you in on the situation.”“For the most part,” I said. “Is there some way we can get together? Tasha wants to get moving as soon as possible.”“My attitude exactly. Listen, I’ve got about an hour before I have to be somewhere else. I can give you some basic information-Guy’s date of birth, his Social Security number, and a photograph if that would help,” he said. “You want to pop on out here?”“Sure, I can do that,” I said. “What about your brothers? Is there some way I can talk to them, too?”“Of course. Bennet said he’d be home around four this afternoon. I’ll call Myrna-she’s the housekeeper and leave word you want to talk to him. I’m not sure about Jack. He’s a little harder to catch, but we can work something out. What you don’t get from me, you can pick up from them. You know where I am? On Dolores out in Colgate. You take the Peterson off-ramp and turn back across the freeway. Second street on the right.”“Sounds good. I’ll see you shortly.”When I hung up the phone, Dietz was checking his watch. “You’re off and running. I’ve got to touch base with an old friend so I’ll be out for a while. Are you free later on?”“Not until six or so. Depends on my appointment. I’m trying to track down a guy who’s been gone eighteen years and I’m hoping to pick up some background from his family.”“I’ll buy you dinner if you haven’t eaten, or we can go out and have a drink. I really don’t want to be a burden.”“We can talk about it later. In the meantime, you’ll need a key.”“That’d be great. I can grab a shower before I take off and lock up when I leave.”I opened the kitchen junk drawer and found the extra house key on a ring of its own. I passed it across the counter.“Are you okay with this? I know you don’t like to feel crowded. I can find a little place on Cabana if you’d prefer peace and quiet.”“This is fine for now. If it’s too much, I’ll say so. Let’s just play it by ear,” I said. “I hope you like your coffee black. There’s no milk and no sugar. Cups are up there.”He put the key in his pocket. “I know where the cups are. I’ll see you later.”Malek Construction consisted of a series of linked trailers, arranged like dominoes, located in the cul-de-sac of an industrial park. Behind the offices, a vast asphalt yard was filled with red trucks: pickups, concrete mixers, skip loaders, and pavers, all bearing the white-and-red company logo. A two-story corrugated metal garage stretched across the backside of the property, apparently filled with maintenance and service equipment for the countless company vehicles. Gas pumps stood at the ready. To one side, against a tangle of shrubs, I could see six bright yellow Caterpillars and a couple of John Deere crawler dozers. Men in hard hats and red coveralls went about their business. The quiet was undercut by the rumble of approaching trucks, an occasional shrill whistle, and the steady peep-peep-peep signal as a vehicle backed up.I parked in the side lot in a space marked VISITOR beside a line of Jeeps, Cherokee Rangers, and battered pickups. On the short walk to the entrance, I could hear the nearby freeway traffic and the high hum of a small plane heading for the airport to the west. The interior of the office suggested a sensible combination of good taste and practicality: glossy walnut paneling, steel blue wall-to-wall carpet, dark blue file cabinets, and a lot of matching dark red tweed furniture. Among the male employees, the standard attire seemed to be ties, dress shirts, and slacks without suit coats or sports jackets. Shoes looked suitable for hiking across sand and gravel. The dress code for the women seemed less codified. The atmosphere was one of genial productivity. Police stations have the same air about them; everyone committed to the work at hand.In the reception area where I waited, all the magazines were work-related, copies of Pit Quarry, Rock Products, Concrete Journal, and the Asphalt Contractor. A quick glance was sufficient to convince me that there were issues at stake here I never dreamed about. I read briefly about oval-hole void forms and multiproperty admixtures, powered telescopic concrete chutes, and portable concrete recycling systems. My, my, my. Sometimes I marveled at the depths of my ignorance.“Kinsey? Donovan Malek,” he said.I looked up, setting the magazine aside as I rose to shake hands with him. “Is it Don or Donovan?”“I prefer Donovan, if you don’t mind. My wife shortens it to Don sometimes, but I make a rare exception for her. Thanks for being so prompt. Come on bark to my office and we can chat.” Malek was fair-haired and clean shaven, with a square, creased face and chocolate brown eyes behind tortoiseshell glasses. I judged him to be six feet tall, maybe two hundred twenty pounds. He wore chinos and his short-sleeved dress shirt was the color of cafe au lait. He had loosened his tie and opened his collar button in the manner of a man who disliked restrictions and was subject to chronic overheating. I followed him out a rear door and across a wooden deck that connected a grid of double-wide trailers. The air conditioner in his office was humming steadily when we walked in.The trailer he occupied had been subdivided into three offices of equal size, extending shotgun style from the front of the structure to the back. Long fluorescent bulbs cast a cold light across the white Formica surfaces of desks and drafting tables. Wide counters were littered with technical manuals, project reports, specs, and blueprints. Sturdy metal bookshelves lined the walls in most places, crammed with binders. Donovan didn’t seem to have a private secretary within range of him and I had to guess that one of several women up front fielded his calls and helped him out with paperwork.He motioned me into a seat and then settled into the high-back leather chair behind his desk. He leaned sideways toward a bookshelf and removed a Santa Teresa high school annual, which he opened at a page marked by a paper clip. He held out the annual, passing it across the desk. “Guy, age sixteen. Who knows what he looks like these days.” He leaned back and watched for my reaction.The kid looking out of the photograph could have been one of my high school classmates, though he preceded me by some years. The two-by-two inch black-and-white head shot showed light curly hair worn long. Braces on his teeth gleaming through partly opened lips. He had a bumpy complexion, unruly eyebrows, and long, fair sideburns.. His shirt fabric was a wild floral pattern. I would have bet money on bell-bottom trousers and a wide leather belt, though neither were visible in the photograph. In my opinion, all high school annuals should be taken out and burned. No wonder we all suffered from insecurity and low self-esteem. What a bunch of weirdo’s we were. I said, “He looks about like I did at his age. What year did he graduate?”“He didn’t. He got suspended six times and finally dropped out. As far as I know, he never even picked up his GED. He spent more time in Juvie than he did at home.”“Tasha mentioned criminal behavior. Can you tell me about that?”“Sure, if I can think where to start. Remember the rumor that you could get high off aspirin and Coca Cola? He went straight out and tried it. Kid was disappointed when it had no effect. He was in the eighth grade at that point. Discounting all the so-called ‘harmless pranks’ he pulled back then, I’d say his first serious transgressions dated back to high school when he was busted twice for possession of marijuana. He was into dope big time-grass, speed, uppers, downers. What did they call ’em back then? Reds and yellow jackets and something called soapers. LSD and hallucinogens came in about the same time. Teenagers didn’t do heroin or cocaine in those days, and nobody’d ever heard of crack. I guess that’s been a more recent development. For a while he sniffed glue, but said he didn’t like, the effect. Kid’s a connoisseur of good highs,” he said derisively. “To pay for the stuff, he’d rip off anything that wasn’t nailed down. He stole cars. He stole heavy equipment from Dad’s construction sites. You get the picture, I’m sure.”“This may sound like an odd question, but was he popular?”“Actually, he was. You can’t tell much from the photograph, but he was a good-looking kid. He was incorrigible, but he had a sort of goofy sweetness that people seemed to find appealing, especially the girls.”“Why? Because he was dangerous?”“I really can’t explain. He was this shy, tragic figure, like he couldn’t help himself. He only had one buddy, fellow named Paul Trasatti.”“Is he still around somewhere?”“Sure. He and Jack are golfing buddies. Bennet pals around with him, too. You can ask when you talk to him. I don’t remember any other friends offhand.”“You didn’t hang out with Guy yourself?”“Not if I could help it,” he said. “I was busy keeping as much distance between us as possible. It got so I had to lock the door to my room so he wouldn’t walk off with everything: You name it, he’d boost it. Stereos and jewelry. Some stuff he did for profit and some was just plain raising hell. After he turned eighteen, he got kind of crafty because the stakes went up. Dad finally flat told him he’d hang him out to dry if he fucked up again. Excuse my bad language, but I still get hot when I think about this stuff.”“Is that when he took off?”“That was when he shifted gears. On the surface, he cleaned up and got a job out here, working in the maintenance shed. He was clever, I must say. Good with his hands and he had a good head on his shoulders. He must have seen this place as the answer to his prayers. He forged checks on Dad’s accounts. He used the company credit card to charge stuff and then sold the goods. Dad, God bless him, was still covering. I begged him to blow the whistle, but he just couldn’t bring himself to do it. Guy strung him along, telling lie after lie.“What can I tell you? Dad wanted to believe him. He’d talk tough. I mean, he’d act like he was really cracking down this time, but when it came right down to it, he always gave in and offered him ‘one more chance.’ Jesus, I got sick of his saying that. I did what I could to close the loopholes, but I could only do so much.” Donovan tapped his temple. “Kid had a screw loose. He was really missing some essential sprocket in the morals department. Anyway, the last stunt he pulled-and this didn’t come out until he’d been gone a couple months-was a scam where he cheated some ‘poor old widder woman’ of her nest egg. That was the last straw. Dad had already kicked his ass out, but we were still stuck with the mess.”“Where were you at that time? I take it you were working for your father.”“Oh, yeah. I’d graduated by then. I’d been in and out of Vietnam, and I was working here as a mining engineer. I got my degree at Colorado School of Mines. My dad’s degree was civil engineering. He started Malek Construction back in 1940, the year I was born, and bought his first gravel pit in forty-three. We were a construction outfit first and ended up owning all our aggregate sources. In fact, we built the business around that because it gives us a competitive edge. There’s a lot of companies around here that do construction that don’t own their aggregate sources and they end up buying from us. I’m the only one of the kids who went into the family business. I didn’t get married till I was thirty-five.”“I understand your mother died the year Guy left,” I said.“That’s right. She’d been diagnosed with lung cancer maybe ten years before. Fought like an alley cat, but she finally went under. I’m sure the uproar didn’t help. Dad never remarried. He didn’t seem to have the heart for it. All he cared about was the company, which is why I was so surprised about the will. Even in 1965, I can’t believe he wanted Guy getting so much as a nickel from his estate.”“Maybe someone will come across the second will.”“I’d like to think so, but so far I’ve turned the house upside down. There was nothing like it in the safe deposit box. I hate to consider what’s going to happen if Guy shows up again.”“Meaning what?”“He’ll cause trouble of some kind. I can guarantee it.”I shrugged. “He might have changed. People sometimes straighten out.”Donovan gestured impatiently. “Sure, and sometimes you win the lottery,, but the odds are against. That’s how it is and I guess we’ll have to live with it.”“You have any idea where he might be?”“No. And I don’t lie awake at night trying to figure it out either. Frankly, it makes me crazy to think of him coming home to roost. I understand that by law he’s entitled to his fair share of the estate, but I think he ought to be a brick about it and keep his hands to himself.” He picked up a piece of paper and slid it in my direction. “Date of birth and his Social Security number. His middle name is David. What else can I tell you?”“What about your mother’s maiden name?”“Patton. Is that for ID purposes?”“Right. If I find him, I’d like to have a way to confirm it’s really Guy we’re dealing with.”“You’re picturing an impostor? That’s hard to imagine,” he said. “Who’d want to be a stand-in for a loser like him?”I smiled. “It’s not that far-fetched. The chances are remote, but it’s been done before. You don’t want to end up turning money over to a stranger.”“You got that right. I’m not all that thrilled to give the money to him. Unfortunately, it’s not up to me. The law’s the law,” he said. “At any rate, I leave this to you. He was a hard-livin’, hard-drinkin’ kid before the age of twenty-one. As to his current whereabouts, your guess is as good as mine. You need anything else?”“This should do for the time being. I’ll talk to your brothers and then we’ll see where we stand.” I got to my feet and we shook hands across the desk. “I appreciate your time.”Donovan came around the desk, walking me to the door.I said, “I’m sure Tasha will have the proper notices published in the local paper. Guy may get wind of it, if he hasn’t already.”“How so?”“He might still be in touch with someone living here.”“Well. That is possible, I suppose. I don’t know how much more we’re obliged to do. If he never turns up, I guess his share of the estate gets placed in an escrow account for some period of time. After that, who knows? The point is, Tasha insists we get it settled and you don’t want to mess with her.”“I should think not,” I said. “Besides, closure is always nice.”“Depends on what kind you’re discussing.”
