---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "M Is for Malice - index_split_016.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - M Is for Malice"
tags: ["guy", "said", "know", "letter", "would", "get", "took", "back", "one", "like", "think", "left", "malek", "could", "minute", "set", "go", "knew", "bower", "side", "see", "let", "well", "told", "felt"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/MIsforMalice-indexsplit016html

---


Unknown
FIFTEENBack in my neighborhood, parking spaces were at a premium and I was forced to leave my VW almost a block away. I locked the car and trotted to my apartment. It was fully dark by then and a chill shivered in the trees like wind. I crossed my arms for warmth, clutching the strap of my handbag as it bumped against my side. I used to carry a handgun as a matter of course, but I’ve given up that practice. I moved through the gate, which gave its usual welcoming squeak. My place was dark, but I could see the lights on in Henry’s kitchen. I didn’t want to be alone. I headed for his backdoor and rapped on the glass.He emerged moments later from the living room. He gave a half wave when he saw me and crossed to let me in. “I was just watching the news. The murder’s on all channels. Sounds bad.”“Awful. It’s vile.”“Have a seat and get warmed up. It’s gotten nippy out there.”I said, “Don’t let me interrupt. I’ll be fine sitting here.”“Don’t be silly. You look cold.”“I’m freezing.”“Well, wrap up.”I put my bag down and grabbed his afghan, folding its weight around me like a shawl as I slid into his rocking chair. “Thanks. This is great. I’ll be warmer in a minute. It’s mostly tension.”“I’m not surprised. Have you eaten supper yet?”“I think I had lunch, but I can’t remember what I ate.”“I’ve got beef stew if you want. I was just about to have a bowl myself.”“Please.” I watched as Henry adjusted the flame under the stew. He took out a loaf of homemade bread, sliced it thickly, and placed it in a basket with a napkin folded over it. He assembled bowls and spoons, napkins, and wine glasses, moving around the kitchen with his usual ease and efficiency. Moments later, he set bowls of stew on the table. I left his rocking chair and shuffled over to the kitchen table still wrapped in his afghan. He pushed the butter in my direction as he settled in his chair. “So tell me the story. I know the basic details. They’ve been blasting that across the TV screen all afternoon.”I began to eat as I talked, realizing how hungry I was. “You may know more than I do. I’m too smart to stick my nose in the middle of a homicide investigation. These days it’s hard enough to put a case together without an outsider interfering.”“You’re not exactly an amateur.”“I’m not an expert either. Let the techs and forensic specialists give it their best shot. I’ll keep my distance unless I’m told otherwise. My stake’s personal, but it’s really not my business. I liked Guy. He was nice. His brothers piss me off. This is great stew.”“You have a theory about the murder?”“Let’s put it this way. This is not a case where some stranger broke in and killed Guy in the middle of a robbery. The poor man was asleep. From what I heard, everybody’d been drinking, so he more than likely passed out. He wasn’t used to hard liquor, especially in massive quantities, which is how the Maleks go at it. Somebody knew where his room was and probably knew he was in no condition to defend himself. I tell you, with the possible exception of Christie, I’ve developed such an aversion to that family I can hardly bear to be under the same roof with them. I feel guilty about Guy. I feel guilty about finding him and guilty he came back. I don’t know what else I could have done, but I wish I’d left him in Marcella where he was safe.”“You didn’t encourage him to return.”“No, but I didn’t argue that strenuously either. I should have been more explicit. I should have detailed their attitude. I thought the danger was emotional. I didn’t think anyone would go after him and bludgeon him to death.”“You think it was one of his brothers?”“I’m tempted by the idea,” I said reluctantly. “It’s a dangerous assumption and I know I shouldn’t jump to conclusions, but it’s always easier to pin suspicion on someone you dislike.”By eight-thirty that night, I was back in my apartment with the door locked. I sat at the kitchen counter for what felt like an hour before I worked up the courage to call Peter and Winnie Antle, who’d been following the story on the Santa Maria news station. The entire church congregation had come together earlier that evening, shocked and saddened by the murder. I hoped to cushion their loss, though in reality their faith provided them more comfort than I was able to offer. I told them I’d do what I could to keep in touch, and I broke the connection feeling little or no solace. Once the lights were turned out, I lay in my bed with a stack of quilts piled over me, trying to get warm, trying to make sense of what had happened that day. I was weighted with dread. Guy’s death had generated something far worse than grief. What I experienced was not sorrow, but, a heavy regret that was wedged in my chest like an undigested lump of hot meat. I didn’t sleep well. My eyes seemed to come open every twenty minutes or so. I changed positions and adjusted the covers. First I was too hot, then too cold. I kept thinking the next arrangement of limbs would offer sufficient comfort to lure me to sleep. I lay on my stomach with my arms shoved under my pillow, turned on my back with my shoulders uncovered. I tried my left side, knees pulled up, arms tucked under, switched to my right side with one foot sticking out. I must have set the alarm without thinking about it because the next thing I knew, the damn thing was going off in my ear, bringing me straight up out of the only decent sleep I’d managed all night. I turned off the alarm. I refused to run. There was no way I was budging from the chrysalis of heat generating quilts. Next thing I knew, it was nine-fifteen and I felt compelled to drag myself out of bed. I had a date with Jonah Robb down at the police station. I checked my reflection in the bathroom mirror. Nice. My color was bad and I had bags under my eyes.As it turned out, it wasn’t Jonah I spoke to but Lieutenant Bower. She kept me waiting for fifteen minutes, sitting on a little two-person bench in what I suppose would be referred to as the lobby at the police station. Under the watchful gaze of the officer at the desk, I shifted in my seat and stared at the rack of crime prevention pamphlets. I also eavesdropped shamelessly while six whining drivers came to complain about their traffic tickets. Finally, Lieutenant Bower peered around the door from the Investigative Division. “Miss Millhone?”I’d never met Betsy Bower, but I’d been curious about her. The name suggested someone perky and blond, a former varsity cheer-leader with terrific thighs and no brains. To my dismay, Lieutenant Bower was the least perky woman I’d had the pleasure to meet. She was the, police equivalent of an Amazon: statuesque, eight inches taller than I, and probably fifty pounds heavier. She had dark hair that she wore skinned straight back, and little round, gold-rimmed glasses. She had a flawless complexion. If she wore makeup at all, it was artfully done. When she spoke, I caught sight of endearingly crooked teeth, which I realized later might have explained her reluctance to smile. It was also possible she didn’t like me and longed to squash me like a bug.I followed her into a small cubicle with two wooden chairs and a scratched wooden table that had a tendency to wobble if you tried to rest your arm on it, pretending to be relaxed. She had nothing with her-no pen, no legal pad, no file, no notes. She looked directly at me, offering a few brisk sentences after which it was my turn. Somehow I had the feeling she’d remember every word I said. More likely our conversation was being recorded surreptitiously. I would have done a furtive feel-check for wiring along the underside of the table, but I was worried about the wads of old chewing gum and dried boogers parked there.She said, “We appreciate your coming in. I understand you were hired by the estate to locate Guy Malek. Can you tell me how you went about that?” Her gaze was watchful, her manner subdued.The question caught me by surprise. I felt a sudden flash of fear, color rising in my cheeks as if I’d just emerged from a tanning booth. I stalled like a little airplane with a tank full of bad fuel. Too late, I realized I should have prepared for this. Ordinarily, I don’t lie to police officers because that would be very naughty, wouldn’t it? At heart, I’m a law-and-order type. I believe in my country, the flag, paying taxes and parking tickets, returning library books on time, and crossing the street with the light. Also, I’m inclined to get tears in my eyes every time I hear the National Anthem sung by somebody who really knows how to belt it out. Right then, however, I knew I was going to have to do a little verbal tap dance because how I “went about” finding Guy Malek wasn’t exactly legitimate. Neither Darcy Pascoe nor I had any business dipping into CFI’s computer system to do a DMV check on a matter completely unrelated to an insurance claim. I’d probably violated some kind of civil ordinance or penal code number something-something. At the very least, the two of us were in serious breach of company policy, department regulations, common decency, and proper etiquette. This might well go down on my permanent record, something my elementary school principal had threatened me with every time I fled school with Jimmy Tait in the fifth and sixth grades. I didn’t think what I’d done was a jailable offense, but I was, after all, sitting at the police station and I did have my private investigator’s license to protect. Since I’d now hesitated a conspicuous five seconds, I thought it was wise to launch in on something.I said, “Ah. Well. I met with Donovan, Bennet, and Jack Malek last Wednesday. In the course of those conversations, I was given Guy Malek’s date of birth and his Social Security number. So late in the day on Thursday, I went over to the DMV offices and asked the clerk if there was any record of a driver’s license in Guy Malek’s name. The information that came back was that his license had been surrendered in 1968, but that he’d been issued a California identification card. His mailing address was listed in Marcella, California. I reported that to Tasha Howard, the attorney for the estate, and to Donovan Malek, who authorized me to drive up to Marcella to verify the address. Marcella’s a small town. I wasn’t there ten minutes before I got a line on Guy. Frankly, I didn’t think he should come down here.”“Why is that?”Hey, as long as my butt wasn’t on the line, I didn’t care who I ratted out here. “His brothers were upset at having to give him a share of their father’s estate. They felt he’d been paid all the monies he was entitled to. There was the issue of a second will, which came up missing when the old man died. Bennet was convinced his father had disinherited Guy, but since that will was never found, the prior will was the one being entered into probate.” I did a little detour at that point, giving Lieutenant Bower the gist of the business about Max Outhwaite, whose letter to the Dispatch had set all the adverse publicity in motion. She didn’t leap up with excitement, but it did serve to distract her (I hoped), from the issue of my illegal computer access.She took me through a series of questions related to the Maleks’ attitude toward Guy, which I characterized as hostile. I told her about the outburst I’d witnessed between Donovan and Bennet. She asked me a number of pointed questions about Jack’s statements regarding Guy, but I honestly couldn’t think of anything he’d said that suggested a homicidal bent. In our initial conversation, he’d expressed bitterness at Guy’s defection, but that had been almost eighteen years ago, so I wasn’t convinced it was relevant. Though I didn’t say so to her, I’d pegged Jack as the family mascot, someone harmless and doglike, trained to distract others with his antics. I didn’t feature him as a prime player in any ongoing domestic drama.“When did you last talk to Guy?” she asked.“He called Monday night. He needed a break so I drove over to the house and met him near the side gate. I was glad to hear from him. I’d been worried because I knew the media had picked up the story. Peter Antle, the pastor of his church up north, had been trying to get in touch with him. The house was literally under siege and it wasn’t possible to get a call through. I’d driven over there once before, hoping to make contact, and I’d just about given up.”“Why were you so interested in talking to him?”“Largely, because Peter and his wife, Winnie, were concerned.”“Aside from that.”I stared at her, wondering what she had in mind. Did she think I was romantically involved? “You never met Guy,” I said, stating it as fact and not a question.“No.” Her face was without animation. Her curiosity was professional and had an analytic cast to it. That was her job, of course, but I found myself struggling to articulate his appeal.“Guy Malek was a beautiful man,” I said in a voice suddenly fragile. Inexplicably, I found myself pricked by grief. My eyes stung with tears. I could feel my face get puffy and my nose turn hot. It seemed odd that in Henry’s company I’d felt nothing while there, but in the face of Betsy Bowers’s cold authority, all my unprocessed sorrow was surfacing. I took a deep breath, trying to cover my emotions. I was avoiding her eyes, but she must have picked up on my distress because she produced a tissue from somewhere that suddenly appeared in my field of vision. I took it with gratitude, feeling vulnerable and exposed.Within moments, I was fine. I have strong self-control and managed to get my emotions back in the box again. “Sorry. I’m not sure where that came from. I really haven’t felt much sorrow since I heard about his death. I should have guessed it was down there. He was a good person and I’m really sorry he’s gone.”“I can understand that,” she said. “Would you care for some water?”“I’ll be fine,” I said. “It’s funny-I really only saw him three times. We talked on the phone, but we weren’t exactly best friends. He seemed boyish, a young soul. I must have a weakness for guys who never quite manage to grow up. I’d already given Donovan an invoice and I figured my job was done. Then Guy called on Saturday. Donovan had called him, urging him to come down so they could talk about the will. Personally, I didn’t think the visit was such a hot idea, but Guy was determined.”“Did he say why?”“He had emotional accounts to pay. At the time he left home, he was messed up on drugs. He’d been in a lot of trouble and alienated just about everyone. Once he was settled in Marcella, he cleaned up his act, but he’d left a lot of unfinished business. He said he wanted to make his peace.”“When you last spoke to him, did he mention contact with other people from his past?”“No. I know a letter was delivered-Christie mentioned it last night-but that came on Monday and Guy never said a word about it when I saw him. As far as I know, there was nothing else. Was it significant?”“We’d rather not discuss the content until we check it out.”“Who wrote it? Or would you rather not discuss that either?”“Right.”“Was it typed?”“Why do you ask?”“Because of the letter to the Dispatch that generated all the hype. If the papers hadn’t been tipped off, no one would have known he was back in town.”“I see what you’re saying. We’ll follow up.”“Can I ask about the autopsy?”“Dr. Yee hasn’t finished yet. Lieutenant Robb is there now. We’ll know more when he gets back.”“What about the murder weapon?”Her face went blank again. I was wasting my breath, but I couldn’t seem to let go. “You have a suspect?” I asked.“We’re pursuing some possibilities. We’re doing backgrounds on a number of people associated with the family. We’re also checking everybody’s whereabouts to see if all the stories add up.”“In other words, you won’t say.”Chilly smile. “That’s correct.”“Well. I’ll do what I can to help.”“We’d appreciate that.”She made no move to close, which was puzzling. From my perspective, we’d pretty much wound up our chat. She’d asked all her questions and I’d told her what I knew. In the unspoken structure of a police interview, Detective Bower was in charge and I’d have to dance to her tune. In the unexpected pause, I could see that it was suddenly her turn to stall.She said, “Rumor has it you’re involved with Lieutenant Robb.”I squinted at her in disbelief. “He told you that?”“Someone else. I’m afraid this is a small town, even smaller when it comes to law enforcement. So it’s not true?”“Well, I was involved, but I’m not now,” I said. “What makes you ask?”The look on her face underwent a remarkable alteration. The careful neutrality fell away and in one split second, she went from blank to blushing.I sat back in my chair, taking a new look at her. “Are you smitten with him?”“I’ve been out with him twice,” she said cautiously.“Ohhh, I see. Now I get it,” I said. “Listen, I’m fond of Jonah, but it’s strictly over between us. I’m the least of your worries. It’s the dread Camilla you’d better. be concerned about.”Detective Betsy Bower had abandoned any pose of professionalism. “But she’s living with some guy and she’s pregnant.”I raised a hand. “Trust me. In the continuing saga of Jonah and Camilla, the mere fact of this infant has no bearing on their relationship. He may act like he’s cured, but he isn’t, believe me. Camilla and Jonah are so enmeshed with each other I don’t know what it would take to split up their act. Actually, now that I think about it, you probably have as good a shot at it as any.”“You really think so?”“Why not? I was always too caught up in my own abandonment issues. I hated being a minor player in their little theater production. We’re talking seventh grade bonding. Junior high school romance. I couldn’t compete. I lack the emotional strength. You look like you could tackle it. You have self-esteem issues? Are you a nail biter? Bed wetter? Jealous or insecure?”She shook her head. “Not a bit.”“What about confrontation?”“I like a good fight,” she said.“Well, you better get ready then because in my experience, she’s indifferent to him until someone else comes along. And for God’s sake, don’t play fair. Camilla goes for broke.”“Thanks. I’ll remember. We’ll be in touch.”“I can’t wait.”On the street again, I felt as if I was emerging from a darkened tunnel. The sunlight was harsh and all the colors seemed too bright. Nine black-and-white patrol cars were lined up along the curb. Across the street, a row of small California bungalows were painted in discordant pastel shades. Flowering annuals in fuchsia, orange, and magenta stood out in bold relief against the vibrant green of new foliage. I left my car in the public parking lot and walked the remaining blocks to work.I entered Kingman and Ives by the unmarked side door. I unlocked my office and let myself in, glancing down at the floor. On the carpet, there was a plain white business-size envelope with my name and address typed across the front. The postmark was Santa Teresa, dated Monday P.M. Distracted, I set my bag on the desk, took out Bader’s file, and set it on top of the file cabinet. I went back to the letter and picked it up with care. I centered it on my desk, touching only the corners while I lifted the handset and dialed Alison in reception.“Hi, Alison. This is Kinsey. You know anything about this letter that was slipped under my door?”“It was delivered yesterday afternoon. I held on to it up here, thinking you’d be back, and finally decided it was better to go ahead and stick it under your door. Why, did I do something wrong?”“You did fine. I was just curious.”I put the phone down and stared at the envelope. I’d picked up a fingerprint kit at a trade show recently and for a moment I debated about dusting for latents. Seemed pointless to tell the truth. Alison had clearly handled it and even if I brought up a set of prints, what was I to do with them? I couldn’t picture the cops running them on the basis of my say-so. Still, I decided to be cautious. I took out a letter opener and slit the flap of the envelope, using the tip to slide the note onto my desk. The paper was cheap bond, folded twice, with no date and no signature. I used a pencil eraser to open the paper, anchoring opposite corners with the letter opener and the edge of my appointment book.Dear Miss Milhone,I thought I should take a moment to inlighten you on the subject of Guy Malek. I wonder if you rilly know who your dealing with. He is a liar and a theif. I find it sickning that he could get a second chance in life threw the acquisition of Sudden Riches, Why should he get the benefitt of five million dollars when he never urned one red cent? I don’t think we can count on him making amens for his passed crimes. You better be carefull your not tared with the same brush.I found a transparent plastic sleeve and slid the letter inside, then opened my desk drawer and took out the copy of the letter Max Outhwaite had written to Jeffrey Katzenbach, placing the two side by side for comparison. On superficial examination, the type font looked the same. As before, my name was misspelled. Thanks, it’s two l’s, please. The sender seemed to have a problem distinguishing your from you’re and consistently reversed the two. The use of threw for through was the same, but there were other oddities of note. My letter was less than half the length of the one to Katzenbach, yet it had more spelling mistakes. To my untutored eye, the two sets of errors were curiously inconsistent. If the writer were relying strictly on phonetics, why would words like acquisition, aforementioned, and besieges be spelled right? Certainly in my letter, there were far fewer commas, exclamation points, and Capitalizations! It was possible there was a certain level of carelessness at work, but I also had to wonder if the writer weren’t simply pretending to use language badly. There was something vaguely amusing about the use of the word amens instead of amends, especially in the context of a born-again.From another angle, why affix the name Max Outhwaite to the first letter, tacking on the embellishment of a phony address, and leave mine unsigned? I had to guess that Outhwaite imagined (quite correctly, as it turned out) that an unsigned letter to the Dispatch would get thrown in the trash. It was also likely the sender had no idea I’d end up with both. While I understood the reasoning behind the letter to the Dispatch, why this one to me? What was Outhwaite’s intent?I took out my magnifying glass and cranked up my three-way bulb to maximum illumination. Under magnification, other similarities became apparent. In both documents, the letter a was twisted on its axis, leaning slightly to the left, and on the lowercase i a portion of the serif was broken off along the bottom. Additionally, the lowercase e, o, a, and d were dirty and tended to print as filled dots instead of circles, suggestive of an old-fashioned fabric ribbon. On my portable Smith Corona, I’d been known to use a straight pin to clean the clogged typewriter keys.I left the letters on my desk and took a walk around the room. Then I sat down in my swivel chair, opened my pencil drawer, and pulled out a pack of index cards. It took me fifteen minutes to jot down the facts as I remembered them, one piece of information per card until I’d exhausted my store. I laid them out on my desk, rearranging the order, shuffling them into columns, looking for connections I hadn’t seen before. It didn’t amount to much from my perspective, but there’d soon be more information available. The autopsy was done by now and the medical examiner would have a concrete opinion about the manner and cause of death. We were all assuming Guy died from blunt-force trauma to the head, but there might be some underlying pathology. Maybe he’d died of a heart attack, maybe he’d been poisoned, expiring in his sleep before the first blow was struck. I couldn’t help but wonder what difference any of it made. Guy would be laid to rest, his body probably taken back to Marcella for burial up there. The various forensic experts would go on sifting through the evidence until the case was resolved. Eventually, the story would be told in its entirety and maybe I’d understand then how everything fit. In the meantime, I was left with all the unrelated fragments and a sick feeling in my stomach.I took the letters down the hall, the one still encased in its plastic sleeve. At the Xerox machine, I made a copy of each so that I now had two sets. The copies I placed in my briefcase, along with the notes I’d made on my index cards. The originals I locked away carefully in my bottom drawer. When the phone rang, I let the answering machine pick up. “Kinsey, this is Christie Malek. Listen, the police were just here with a warrant for Jack’s arrest-”I snatched up the receiver. “Christie? It’s me. What’s going on?”“Oh, Kinsey. Thank God. I’m sorry to bother you, but I didn’t know what else to do. I put a call through to Donovan, but he’s out in the field. I don’t know where Bennet’s gone. He left about nine, without a word to anyone. Do you know the name of a good bail bondsman? Jack told me to get him one, but I’ve looked in the Yellow Pages and can’t tell one from the other.”“Are you sure he’s in custody? They didn’t just take him to the station for another interview?”“Kinsey, they put him in handcuffs. They read him his rights and took him off in the back of an unmarked car. We were both in shock. I don’t have any money-less than a hundred bucks in cash-but if I knew who to call...”“Forget about the bondsman. If Jack’s being charged with murder, it’s a no-bail warrant. What he needs is a good criminal attorney and the sooner the better.”“I don’t know any attorneys, except Tasha!” she shrieked. “What am I supposed to do, pick a name out of a hat?”“Wait a minute, Christie. Just calm down.”“I don’t want to calm down. I’m scared. I want help.”“I know that. I know. Just wait a minute,” I said. “I have a suggestion. Lonnie Kingman’s office is right next door to mine. You want me to go see if he’s in? You can’t do better than Lonnie. He’s a champ.”She was silent for an instant. “All right, yes. I’ve heard of him. That sounds good.”“Give me a few minutes and we’ll see what we can do.
