---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "M Is for Malice - index_split_008.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - M Is for Malice"
tags: ["could", "said", "like", "one", "two", "back", "well", "see", "take", "know", "took", "door", "day", "long", "way", "put", "say", "u", "time", "henry", "dietz", "paper", "across", "might", "look"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/MIsforMalice-indexsplit008html

---


Unknown
SEVENWhen we returned to the apartment at ten-fifteen, Henry’s kitchen light was on. Dietz said his knee was killing him, so he let himself into the apartment where he intended to take a couple of pain pills, prop his feet up, and put his ice pack to work. I said I’d be along momentarily. Our conversation at Rosie’s hadn’t really gone anywhere. I couldn’t bear to continue and I couldn’t bear behaving as though the subject hadn’t been broached. I didn’t know what I wanted from him and I wasn’t sure how to say it anyway, so I just ended up sounding needy. My general policy is this: If your mind isn’t open, keep your mouth shut, too.I knocked on Henry’s backdoor, waving at him through the window when he looked up at me. He was sitting in his rocking chair with the evening paper and his glass of Jack Daniel’s. He smiled and waved back, setting the paper aside so he could let me in. He had the heat turned up and the inside air was not only warm, but deliciously scented with yesterday’s cinnamon rolls.“This feels great. It’s really cold out there,” I said. The kitchen table was covered with old black-and-white photographs sorted into piles. I glanced at them briefly as I pulled out a kitchen chair and turned my attention to him. From my point of view, Henry Pitts is perfection-smart, good-natured, and responsible-with the cutest legs I’ve ever seen. He’s been my landlord for five years, since the day I spotted the ad for the apartment in a Laundromat. Henry was looking for a long-term tenant who was clean and quiet; no children, loud parties, or small, yapping dogs. As a lifelong mobile home inhabitant, I was addicted to compact spaces, but ready to limit contact with a lot of close, unruly neighbors. Trailer-park life, for all its virtues, entails an intimate acquaintance with other people’s private business. Since I make a living as a snoop, I’d just as soon keep my personal affairs to myself. The converted single-car garage Henry was offering was better than my fantasies and affordable as well. Since then, the place had been bombed and rebuilt, the interior fitted out in teak and as cleverly designed as a ship’s.From the outset, Henry and I established just enough of a relationship to suit us both. Over the years, he’s managed to civilize me to some extent and I’m certainly more agreeable now than I was back then. Little by little, we forged the bond between us until now I consider him the exemplary mix of friend and generic family member.“You want a cup of tea?” he asked.“No, thanks. I just stopped to say hi before I hit the sack. Are these family pictures?” I asked, picking one at random.“That’s the claim,” he said. “Nell sent me those. She came across two boxes of old family photographs, but none are labeled. No names, no dates. She hasn’t an idea who these people are and neither do the other sibs. What a mess. Take my word for it. You should mark all your photographs, even if it’s just a quick note on the back. You might know who’s who, but nobody else will.”“Do they look familiar to you?”“A few.” He took the print I was looking at and squinted as he held it to the light. I peered over his shoulder. The woman in the picture must have been in her twenties, with a broad, bland face and hair drawn back in a bun. She wore a white middy blouse, with a calf-length skirt, dark stockings, and flat, dark shoes with a bow across the instep. Standing beside her was a glum-faced girl of eight with a drop-waist sailor dress and ankle-high lace up shoes. “I believe this is a picture of my mother’s younger sister, Augusta, taken in Topeka, Kansas, back in 1915. The child’s name was Rebecca Rose, if memory serves. She and her mother both died in the big influenza epidemic of 1918.” He picked up another one. “This is my mother with my grandfather Tilmann. I’m surprised Nell didn’t recognize them except her eyesight’s fading. Now that I think of it, I’m not sure why it matters. None of us have children, so once we’re gone, it won’t make any difference who these people are.”“Well, that seems sad. Why don’t you put ’em in an album and pass them on to me? I’ll pretend they’re mine. What was his first name?”“Klaus. My mother’s name was Gudrun.” The man staring fixedly at the camera must have been in his late seventies, the daughter beside him in her fifties by the look of her. I said, “What’s the name Tilmann? Is that German? I somehow imagined you were all Swedes or Finns.”“Oh no, we’re not Scandinavian. They’re gloomy sorts, in my opinion. The Tilmanns were good German stock. Headstrong, autocratic, vigorous, and exacting. Some would say impossible, but that’s a matter of interpretation. Longevity is genetic and don’t ever let anybody tell you otherwise. I read those articles about folks who live to be a hundred. They all try to take credit, claim it’s because they smoke or don’t smoke, eat yogurt, take vitamins, or a tablespoon of vinegar a day. What nonsense. War and accidents excepted, you live a long time because you come from other people who live a long time. You have to take responsibility. You can’t subject yourself to any kind of gross mistreatment. My mother lived to be a hundred and three and I imagine the remaining five of us will live that long as well.”“You certainly seem to be in good shape. Nell’s what, ninety-six? And you have your eighty-sixth birthday. coming up on Valentine’s Day.”Henry nodded, making a motion as if to knock on wood. “We’re healthy, in the main, though we’re all shrinking down to some extent. We’ve talked about this and it’s our contention that the shrinkage is nature’s way of assuring you don’t take up so much space in your coffin. You lighten up, too. Feels like taking air into your bones. Makes it easy on the pallbearers. And, of course, your faculties shut down. You get blind as a bat and your hearing fades. Charlie says it sounds like he’s got a pillow on his head all the time these days. Get old, you might as well not worry about your dignity. Anybody talks about dignity for old folks has never been around one as far as I can tell. You can keep your spunk, but you have to give up your vanity early on. We’re all in diapers. Well, I’m not, but then I’m the baby in the family. The rest of them leak any time they cough or laugh too hard.“Nell says one reason she misses William so much now he’s moved out here is because they can’t play bridge like they used to. Have to play three-handed, which isn’t as much fun. Lewis was thinking about asking a cousin to move in, but Nell won’t tolerate another woman in the house. She says she’s had her brothers to herself now for sixty years and she’s not about to change. Nell says once she ‘goes’ they can do anything they want, depending on who’s left.”“I can’t believe they’re still willing to endure the winters in Michigan. Why don’t they all move out here? You could play all the bridge you want.”“There’s talk of that. We’ll just have to see. Nell has her ladies’ luncheon group and she hates to leave them.” Henry put the photo down and took his seat again. “Now then, how are you? I had a nice chat with your friend Dietz. He says you picked up some work.”“Actually, I finished it. One of those quickies you remember fondly when the tough ones come along,” I said. I took a few minutes to fill him in on the search for Guy Malek.Henry shook his head. “What’s going to happen? Do you think he’ll get his share of the estate?”“Who knows? I don’t always hear the end of it, but Tasha thinks they’ll be able to work something out.”“How long will Dietz be here? I thought I’d have the two of you over for supper one night.”“Probably not long. He’s on his way up to Santa Cruz to see his sons,” I said.“Well, let me know if he’s still going to be here Saturday and I’ll cook something special. We’ll invite William and Rosie and Moza Lowenstein, if she’s free.”By the time I let myself into my place, Dietz had fallen asleep in his underwear, slouched down in his chair, snoring lightly. The television set was on, the volume low, the channel tuned to a nature show about underwater shark attacks. Dietz had his leg propped up on the edge of the sofa bed, a blanket pulled up across his chest and shoulders. The partially melted ice pack had toppled to the floor. I put that ice pack in the freezer and took out a second one, laying it carefully across his knee without waking him. His kneecap was swollen, the bare flesh looking pale and vulnerable. I left him as he was, knowing he’d wake long before morning. He sleeps in fits and starts like an animal in the wild, and I knew from past experience he seldom manages to make it through the night without getting up at feast twice.I eased off my shoes and made my way up the spiral stairs. From above, I stared down at him. His lined face looked alien in sleep, as if sculptured in clay. I seldom saw him at ease. He was restless by nature, perpetually in motion, his features animated by the sheer force of his nervous energy. Even as I watched, he stirred himself awake, jerking upright with a look of disorientation. I could see him wince, reaching for the ice pack balanced on his distended joint. I stepped away from the loft rail and went into the bathroom, where I washed my face and brushed my teeth. It was no doubt the proximity to all that testosterone, but I could feel the murmur of sexuality at the base of my spine. I grabbed an oversized T-shirt from a hook on the bathroom door. I usually sleep in the nude, but it seemed like a bad idea.Once ready for bed, I turned out the light and slipped under the quilt. I reached out and set my alarm, watching the digital clock flip from 11:04 to 11:05. Below, I could hear Dietz get up and move into the kitchen. The refrigerator door opened and closed. He took down a glass and poured himself a drink-wine, orange juice, or milk-something liquid at any rate. I heard him pull out a kitchen stool, followed by the rustle of newspaper. I wondered what he was thinking, wondered what would happen if I heard him climbing the stairs. Maybe I should have pulled on a robe and gone down to join him, thrown caution to the wind and to hell with the consequences, but it was not in my nature. Being single for so long had made me cautious about men. I stared up at the Plexiglas skylight above my bed, thinking about the risks involved in reaching out to him. Passion never lasts, but then what does? If you could have it all, but only briefly, would the rush of love be worth the price in pain? I could feel myself sinking into sleep as though weighted down with stones. I didn’t rise again until 5:59 A.M.I pulled on my sweats, preparing for my run as usual. Dietz was in the shower when I left the house, but I noticed with a pang he was in the process of packing. He’d laid the soft-sided suitcase open on the floor near the sofa bed, which he’d folded away. The blanket had been refolded and placed across one end. He’d piled the sheets he’d used near the washer. Maybe he felt his exodus would address my issues with him, minimizing the chances of my forming an attachment. What I noticed, perversely, was that, having felt nothing on his arrival, I was now afflicted with a stinging sense of loss at his departure. He’d been with me for two days and I was already suffering, so maybe I’d been smart not to take things any further. I’d been celibate for so long, what was another year without sex? I made an involuntary sound that might have been a whimper if I allowed myself such things.I closed the door quietly behind me, breathing deeply as though the damp morning air might ease the fire in my chest. Having passed through the front gate, I paused while I stretched, keeping my mind a blank. In the last several years as a private investigator, I’ve developed a neat trick for shutting off my feelings. Like others who work in the “helping” professions-doctors and nurses, police officers, social workers, paramedics, emotional disconnection is sometimes the only way to function in the face of death with all its tacky variations. Originally, my detachment took several minutes of concentrated effort, but now I make the shift in the blink of an eye. Mental-health enthusiasts are quick to assure us that our psychological well-being is best served by staying in touch with our feelings, but surely they’re not referring to the icky, unpleasant ones.The run itself was unsatisfactory. The dawn was overcast, the sky a brooding gray unrelieved by any visible sunrise. Gradually, daylight overtook the lowering dark, but the whole of it had the bleached look of an old black-and-white photograph. My gait felt choppy and I never really hit my stride. The air was so chilly I couldn’t even generate a decent sweat. I dutifully counted off the miles, feeling gratified to be doing it in spite of myself. Some days the discipline is an end in itself, a way of asserting the will in the face of life’s little setbacks. I walked the half block home, carefully brushing aside any slovenly sentiment.Dietz was sitting at the counter when I got in. He’d put on a pot of coffee and set out my cereal bowl. His bowl was already washed, rinsed, and drying in the dish rack. His suitcase, fully zipped, was waiting by the door along with his garment bag. Through the open bathroom door, I could see he’d tidied the basin of all his personal possessions. The scent of soap mingled with his aftershave, a damp male perfume permeating everything.“I thought it might be easier if I took off,” he said.“Sure, no problem. I hope you’re not doing it on my account.”“No, no. You know me. I’m not that good at staying put,” he said. “Anyway, you probably have a lot of work to do.”“Oh, tons,” I said. “You’re heading up to Santa Cruz?”“Eventually, yes. I’ll drive on up the coast, maybe spend a day in Cambria. With this knee, I have to break up the trip, anyway. You know, get out and stretch every hour or so. Keep it warm and loose. Otherwise, it locks up.”“What time are you taking off?”“Whenever you leave for work.”“Well, great. I’ll just grab a shower then and you can hit the road.”“Take your time. I’m in no hurry,” he said.“I can see that,” I remarked, as I headed up to the loft. This time he didn’t ask if I was mad. This was good because, in truth, I was furious. Under the fury was the old familiar pain. Why does everyone end up leaving me? What did I ever do to them? I went through my morning routine as efficiently as possible, flung on my clothes, and ate my cereal without pausing to read the paper. To demonstrate my indifference to his abrupt departure, I took out fresh sheets and asked him to help me remake the sofa bed. I hoped the implication was that some other guy was lined up for bed space as soon as he left. Neither of us said much and what we said was transactional. “Where’s the other pillowcase?” About like that.Once the sofa was redone, he took his suitcase to the car and came back for the garment bag. I walked him out to the curb and we exchanged one of those insincere kisses with the sound effects attached. Mmch! He fired up his Porsche and I dutifully waved as he roared off down the street. You little shit, I thought.I went into the office, ignoring a faint tendency to tear up for no reason. The day yawned in front of me like a sinkhole in the street. This was just what it felt like when he left before. Now how does this happen to someone of my rare spunk and independence? I play a few rounds of solitaire, paid some bills, and balanced my checkbook. Anxiety whispered in my gut like a stomachache. When the phone finally rang just before lunch, I snatched up the receiver, absurdly grateful at the interruption.“Kinsey. This is Donovan. How are you?”“Gee, I’m just fine. How are you?”“Well enough. Uh, listen, we got your message and we’d like to compliment you on a job well done. Tasha had to fly back to San Francisco this morning, but she said she didn’t think you’d mind giving us the information firsthand. Could you stop by the house for a drink late this afternoon?”“Well, sure. I could do that. I was going to type up my report and put it in the mail, but I can give you a rundown in person if you’d prefer.”“I’d appreciate that. I expect Jack and Bennet will want to be there as well. That way, if they have questions, you can fill us all in at the same time and save yourself the repetition. Would five-thirty be convenient?”“Fine with me,” I said.“Good. We’ll look forward to seeing you.”After I hung up, I could feel myself shrug. I had nothing against an informal report as long as I didn’t somehow get sucked into the family drama. Aside from Guy, I wasn’t crazy about the Malek brothers. I happened to believe Guy had changed his wicked ways, so maybe I could do him a service and convince the others Not that it was any of my business how the monies were distributed, but if there were any lingering questions about his “worthiness,” I certainly had an opinion Besides, with Dietz now gone, I didn’t have anything better to do.I skipped lunch and spent the afternoon cleaning my office. Lonnie Kingman had a maintenance crew that serviced the premises weekly on Friday afternoons, but it felt therapeutic to get in there and scrub. I even spent twenty minutes dusting the artificial fichus plant someone had once mistaken for real. The space I occupied had originally been a conference room with a full “executive” bathroom attached. I found a plastic bucket, sponges, cleansers, a toilet brush, and mop and entertained myself mightily killing imaginary germs. My method of coping with depression is to take on chores so obnoxious and disgusting that reality seems pleasant by comparison. By three o’clock, I smelled of sweat and household bleach and I’d forgotten what I was so unhappy about. Well, actually, I remembered, but I didn’t give a shit.Having sanitized the suite, I locked the door, stripped off my clothes, hopped in the executive shower, and scrubbed myself. I dressed again in the same jeans, pulling on a fresh turtleneck from the ready supply I keep handy for sudden travel. What’s life without a toothbrush and clean underpants? I typed up the official version of my encounter with Guy Malek, tucking one copy in my office files, another in my handbag. The third I addressed to Tasha Howard at her San Francisco office. The end. Finito. Done, done, done. This was the last job I’d ever take from her.By 5:25, dressed in my best (and only) wool tweed blazer, I drove through the entrance to the Malek estate. It was close to dark by then, the winter shortened days still characterized by early twilights. My headlights swept in a forlorn arc across the stucco wall surrounding the fifteen-acre property. Along the rim of the wall, three strands of rusted barbed wire had been strung years ago, broken now in places and looking singularly ineffective. Who knows what intruders were anticipated back then? A chilly wind had picked up and the darkened treetops swayed and shivered, whispering together about things unseen. There were lights on in the house, two upstairs windows illuminated in pale yellow where much of the first floor was dark.The housekeeper had neglected to turn on the outside lights. I parked in the turnaround and picked my way across the cobblestone courtyard to the shadowy portico that sheltered the entranceway in front. I rang the bell and waited, crossing my arms for warmth. The porch light was finally flipped on and Myrna opened the door a crack.“Hi, Myrna. Kinsey Millhone. I was here the other day. Donovan invited me for drinks.”Myrna didn’t exactly break into song at the news. Apparently, advanced classes in Housekeeper’s Training School cautioned the students not to give expression to sudden bursts of joy. In the two days since I’d seen her last, she’d renewed the dye job on her hair and the whole of it was now a white blond that looked like it would be cold to the touch. Her uniform consisted of a gray top worn over matching gray pants. I would have bet money the waistband was unbuttoned underneath the tunic. “This way,” she said. Her crepe-soled shoes squeaked slightly on the polished parquet floor.A woman called down from somewhere above our heads. “Myrna? Was that the front door? We’re expecting someone for drinks.” I glanced up, following the sound of her voice. A brunette in her late thirties was leaning on the stair rail above our heads. She caught sight of me and brightened. “Oh, hi. You must be Kinsey. You want to come on up?”Myrna veered off without another word, disappearing into the rear of the house as I climbed the stairs.Christie held out her hand when I reached the upper landing. “I’m Christie Malek. Nice to meet you,” she said as we shook hands. “I take it you’ve met Myrna.”“More or less,” I said. I took her in at a glance, like an instant Polaroid. She was a fine-featured brunette with shiny dark hair, worn shoulder length. She was very slender, wearing jeans and a bulky black-ribbed sweater that came down almost to her knees. She had the sleeves rolled back and her wrists were thin, her fingers long and cool. Her eyes were small, a dark penetrating blue, beneath a lightly feathered brow. Her teeth were as perfect as a mouthwash ad’s. The absence of eye makeup gave her a recessive, slightly anxious air, though her manner was friendly and her smile was warm enough. “Donovan called to say he’d be a few minutes late. Jack’s on his way home and Bennet’s around some place. I’m just going through Bader’s papers and I’d love some company.”Still talking to me, she turned and moved toward the master bedroom, which I could see through an open doorway. “We’re still looking for the missing will, among other things. Ever hopeful,” she added wryly.“I thought Bennet was going to do that.”“This is how Bennet does things. He loves to delegate.”I hoped there was a touch of irony in her tone. I couldn’t be sure so I kept my mouth shut.The suite we entered was enormous; two substantial rooms separated by a pair of doors that had been pushed into their respective wall pockets. We passed through the outer room, which had been furnished as a bedroom. The walls were padded fabric, covered in rose-colored silk with a watered sheen to the finish. The carpet was off-white, a dense, cut pile. Pale, heavy drapes had been pulled back to reveal the leaded glass windows that looked out onto the cobblestone entrance at the front of the house. There was a marble fireplace on the wall to the left. Two matching sofas were arranged on either side of it, plump, upholstered pieces covered in a subdued floral chintz. The four-poster bed had been flawlessly made, not a ripple or a wrinkle in the snowy-white silk coverlet. The surface of the bed table seemed unnaturally bare, as if once-personal items had now been hidden from sight. It might have been my imagination, but the room seemed to harbor the lingering scent of sickness. I could see that closets were being emptied, the contents-suits and dress shirts packed into large cardboard boxes supplied by the local Thrift Store Industries downtown.“This is gorgeous,” I said.“Isn’t it?”Beyond the sliding doors, a home office had been set up, with a large walnut desk and antique wooden file cabinets. The ceilings in both rooms were twelve feet high, but this was by far the cozier of the two. A fire had been laid in a second marble fireplace and Christie paused to add a log to an already snapping blaze. The walls here were paneled in walnut as dark and glossy as fudge. I could see a copier, a fax machine, computer, and a printer arranged on the built-in shelves on either side of the fireplace. A paper shredder stood on one side of the desk, its green On button lighted. I could see printed acknowledgments stacked up waiting to be addressed to those who’d sent flowers to the funeral.Christie returned to the desk where she’d emptied the contents of two drawers into banker’s boxes that she’d labeled with a black marker. There were two big plastic garbage bags bulging with discarded papers. Thick files were stacked on the desktop and a number of empty file folders were strewn across the carpet. This was the kind of task I knew well, classifying the odds and ends left behind by the dead. Below, in the courtyard, we could hear a motorcycle cruise in, the engine being revved once more before it was silenced.Christie cocked her head. “I hear the Harley. Sounds like Jack’s home.”“How’s it going so far?”Her expression was a wry mix of skepticism and despair. “Bader was supremely organized for the most part, but he must have lost his enthusiasm for jobs like this. Look at all this stuff. I swear, if I’m ever diagnosed as terminal, I’m going to clean out my files before I get too sick to care. What if you kept pornographic pictures or something like that? I’d hate to think of someone sorting through my private affairs.”“Nothing in my life is that interesting,” I said. “You want help?”“Not really, but I could use the moral support,” she said. “I’ve been in here for hours. I have to look at every single piece of paper and figure out if it’s worth saving, though most aren’t as far as I can tell. I mean, what do I know? Anything I’m not sure about, I put in one pile. The really junky stuff, I go ahead and shove in a garbage bag. I don’t dare shred a thing and I’m afraid to toss much. I know Bennet. As sure as I pitch something, he tears in here and wants to know where it is. He’s done that to me twice and it was just dumb luck the trash hadn’t been picked up. I’m out there in the dark, like a bag lady, pulling crumpled papers out of the garbage can. This third pile is everything that looks important. For instance, here’s something you might like.” She picked up a file from the stack on top of the desk and handed it to me. “Bader must have put this together back in the early sixties.”A quick glance inside revealed a collection of newspaper clippings related to Guy’s past misbehavior. I read one at random, an article dating back to 1956 detailing the arrest of two juveniles, boys aged fourteen and thirteen, who were believed to be responsible for a spree of graffiti vandalism. One of the teens was booked into juvenile Hall, the other released to his parents. There must have been twenty-five such snippets. In some cases, the authorities withheld the names because the boy or boys arrested were still minors. In other articles, Guy Malek was identified by name.“I wonder why Bader kept clippings. It seems odd,” I said.“Maybe to remind himself why he disinherited the kid. I figure Bennet will want ’em for ammunition if it comes down to that. It’s exhausting just trying to make these decisions.”“Quite a job,” I said and then shifted the subject matter. “You know, it occurred to me that since the two wills were drawn up only three years apart, the two witnesses for the first might have been witnesses for the second will, too. Especially if they were paralegals or law clerks working in the attorney’s office.”She looked at me with interest. “Good point. You’ll have to mention that to Donovan. None of us are anxious to see five million bucks flying out the window.”There was a tap at the door and we both turned to see that Myrna had reappeared. “Donovan’s home. He asked me to serve the hors d’oeuvres in the living room.”“Tell him we’ll be down in a second, as soon as I wash my hands. Oh, and see if you can round up the other two.”Myrna took in the request, murmured something inaudible, and withdrew from the room.Christie shook her head, lowering her voice a notch. “She may be on the glum side, but she’s the only person in the house who doesn’t argue with everyone.
