---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "M Is for Malice - index_split_021.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - M Is for Malice"
tags: ["bennet", "said", "back", "office", "door", "could", "get", "would", "guy", "see", "letter", "time", "one", "room", "way", "sure", "christie", "good", "jack", "want", "two", "probably", "think", "around", "home"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/MIsforMalice-indexsplit021html

---


Unknown
TWENTYI stopped at a pay phone and put a call through to Lonnie, who had the good grace to laugh when he heard my account of the conversation with Paul Trasatti. “Forget it. The guy’s a prick. He was just on the phone to me, whining and complaining about harassment. What a jerk.”“Why’s he so worried about Jack?”“Forget Jack for now. I’ll take care of him. You better go talk to Bennet; I couldn’t get to him. According to the grapevine, he’s talking to an attorney in case the hairy eyeball of the law falls on him next. He’s still got no alibi, as far as I’ve heard.”“Well, that’s interesting.”“Yeah, people are getting nervous. That’s a good sign,” he said. He gave me the address of Bennet’s restaurant, which was located downtown on a side street off State. The neighborhood itself was marked by a tire store, a minimart, a video rental shop, and a billiard parlor where fights erupted without much provocation beyond excess beer. Parking didn’t seem to be readily available and it was hard to picture where the restaurant trade would be coming from.Apparently, the place had once been a retail store, part of a chain that had filed for bankruptcy. The old sign was still out, but the interior had been gutted. The space was cavernous and shadowy, the floor bare concrete, the ceiling high. Heating ducts and steel girders were exposed to view, along with all of the electrical conduit. Toward the rear, an office had been roughed in: a desk, file cabinets, and office equipment arranged in a bare-framed cubicle. The back wall was solid and through a narrow doorway, I could see a toilet and a small sink with a medicine cabinet above it. It was going to take a lot of money to complete construction and get the business on its feet. No wonder Bennet had been so eager to get his hands on the second will. If Guy’s share was divided among his brothers, each would be richer by more than a million, which he could clearly use.To the right, a huge rolling metal door had been opened onto a weedy vacant lot. Outside, the sun was harsh, sparkling on the broken bottles while its heat baked a variety of doggy turds. There was not a soul in sight, but the building was wide open and I kept thinking Bennet, or a construction worker, would show up before long. While I waited, I wandered into the office area and took a seat at Bennet’s desk. The secretarial chair was rickety and I imagined he made his phone calls upright with his hip resting on the desk, which seemed sturdier. Everything in the office had an air of having been borrowed or picked up on the cheap. The calculator tape showed a long series of numbers that didn’t add up to anything. I could have checked in the drawers, but I was too polite. Besides, my recent clash with Paul Trasatti had chastened me some. I didn’t want Lonnie getting two complaints in a single day.There was a manual typewriter sitting on a rolling cart. My gaze slid across it idly and then came back. It was an ancient black Underwood with round yellowed keys that looked like they’d be hard to press. The ribbon was so worn it was thin in the middle. I looked over at the rolling door and then surveyed the whole of the empty restaurant space. Still no one. My bad angel was hovering to my left. It was she who pointed out the open packet of typing paper sitting right there in plain sight.I pulled out a sheet and rolled it into the machine, settling myself on the wobbly typing chair. I typed my name. I typed that old standby: The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog. I typed the name Max Outhwaite. I typed Dear Miss Millhone. I peered closely. The vowels didn’t appear to be clogged, which (as Dietz had pointed out) didn’t mean that much. This could still be the typewriter used for the notes. Maybe Bennet had simply made a point of cleaning his keys. I pulled the paper out and folded it, then stood up and slipped it in the pocket of my jeans. When I got back to the office, I’d see if the defective a and i were visible under magnification. I still hadn’t seen the anonymous letter Guy had received the Monday before he died, but maybe Betsy Bower would relent and let me pirate a copy.The telephone rang.I stared at it briefly and then lifted my head, listening for footsteps heading in my direction. Nothing. The phone rang again. I was tempted to answer, but I really didn’t need to because the answering machine kicked in. Bennet’s voice message was brief and very businesslike. So was the caller.“Bennet. Paul here. Give me a call as soon as possible.”The machine clicked off. The message light blinked off and on. My bad angel tapped me on the shoulder and pointed. I reached out and pressed DELETE. A disembodied male voice told me the message had been erased. I headed for the front door, breaking into a trot when I reached the street. Trasatti was a busy boy, calling everyone.A Harley-Davidson rumbled into view. Shit. Bennet was back just when I thought I’d escaped. I slowed my pace, as if I had all the time in the world. Bennet rolled Jack’s motorcycle up to the curb less than ten feet away. He killed the engine and popped the kickstand into place. He peeled off his helmet and cradled it under his arm. I noticed his hair was tightly frizzed and matted with sweat. Despite the heat, he was wearing a black leather jacket, probably protection in case he flipped the bike and skidded. “Working again?”“I’m always working,” I said.“Did you want to talk to me?” His jacket creaked when he walked. He headed into the restaurant.I followed. “How goes construction? It’s looking pretty good,” I said. It looked like a bomb crater, but I was kissing butt. Our footsteps echoed as we crossed the raw concrete floor.“Construction’s slow.”I said, “Ah. What’s your target for opening?”“April, if we’re lucky. We have a lot of work to do.”“What kind of restaurant?”“Cajun and Caribbean. We’ll have salads and burgers, too, very reasonably priced. Maybe jazz two nights a week. We’re really aiming for the singles’ market.”“Like a pickup bar?”“With class,” he said. “This town doesn’t have a lot going on at night. Get some dance music in here weekends, I think we’re filing a niche. A chef from New Orleans and all the hot local bands. We should pull crowds from as far away as San Luis Obispo.”“That sounds rowdy,” I said. We’d reached the office by then and I saw him flick a glance at his answering machine. I was only half listening, trying to think how to keep the conversation afloat. “Any problem with parking?”“Not at all,” he said. “We’ll pave the lot next door. We’re in negotiations at the moment. There’s room for thirty cars there and another ten on the street.”“Sounds good,” I said. He had an answer for everything. Mr. Slick, I thought.“I’ll comp you some tickets for the grand opening. You like to dance?”“No, not really.”“Don’t worry about it. We’ll get you in and you can cut loose. Forget your inhibitions and get down,” he said. He snapped his fingers, dipping his knees in a move meant to be oh so hip.My least favorite thing in life is some guy encouraging me to “cut loose” and “get down.” The smile I offered him was paper-thin. “I hope this business with Jack has been resolved by then.”“Absolutely,” he said smoothly, his expression sobering appropriately. “How’s it looking so far?”“He can’t account for his time, which doesn’t help,” I said. “The cops are claiming they found a bloody print from his shoe on the carpet up in Guy’s room. I won’t bore you with details. Lonnie wanted me to ask where you were.”“The night of the murder? I was club-hopping down in L. A.”“You drove to Los Angeles and back?”“I do it all the time. It’s nothing. Ninety minutes each way,” he said. “That night, some of the time I was on the road.”“Did you have a date?”“This was strictly business. I’m trying to get a feel for what works and what doesn’t, sampling menus. You know, listening to some of the L. A. bands.”“I’m assuming you have credit card receipts to back you up.”A fleeting change of expression suggested I’d caught him out on that one. “I might have a few. I’ll have to look and see what I’ve got. I paid cash in the main. It’s easier that way.”“What time did you get in?”“Close to three,” he said. “You want to come in the back? I’ve got some beer in a cooler. We could have a drink.”“Thanks. It’s a bit early.”“Where you going?”“Back to the office. I have a meeting,” I said.On the way back to the office, I stopped off at a deli and picked up some soft drinks and sandwiches. Dietz had said he’d be joining me as soon as he’d finished his research. I stashed the soft drinks in the little refrigerator in my office and dumped my handbag on the floor beside my chair. I put the sack of sandwiches on the file cabinet and grabbed the folder full of clippings, which I tossed on my desk. I sat down in my swivel chair and assembled my index cards, the typewritten letters, and the sample I’d just taken from Bennet’s machine, lining everything up in an orderly fashion. In the absence of definitive answers, it’s good to look organized.I turned on the desk lamp and pulled out my magnifying glass. The type was no match. I was disappointed, but I wasn’t surprised. I took Guy’s last letter from my handbag and read the contents again. Aside from his invitation to Disneyland, which I’d have accepted in a flash, I realized that what I was looking at, in essence, was a holographic will. The letter was written entirely by hand and he’d specified in the postscript what he’d wanted done with his share of his father’s estate. I didn’t know all the technicalities associated with a holographic will, but I thought this might qualify. The handwriting would have to be verified, but Peter Antle could do that when I saw him next. I knew Guy had received a disturbing letter late that Monday afternoon, and whatever its contents, he must have been sufficiently alarmed to want to make his wishes clear. I got up and left the office, taking his letter with me to the copy room. I ran a Xerox and then locked the originals with the others in my bottom drawer. The copy I slid in the outer pocket of my handbag.I tried to picture Guy, but his face had already faded in my mind’s eye. What remained was his sweetness, the sound of his “Hey,” the feeling of his whiskers when he’d brushed my cheek with his lips. If he’d lived, I’m not sure we would have had a very strong relationship. Kinsey Millhone and a born-again was probably not a combination that would have gone anywhere. But we might have been friends. We might have gone to Disneyland once a year to experience some silliness.I went back to my index cards and began to make notes. Every investigation has a nature of its own, but there are certain shared characteristics, namely the painstaking accumulation of information and the patience required. Here’s what you hope for: a chance remark from the former neighbor on a skip-trace, a penciled notation on the corner of a document, an exspouse with a grudge, the number on an account, an item overlooked at the scene of a crime. Here’s what you expect: the dead ends, bureaucratic bullheadedness, the cul-de-sacs, trails that go nowhere or simply fade into thin air, denials, prevarications, the blank-eyed stares from all the hostile witnesses. Here’s what you know: that you’ve done it before and you have the toughness and determination to pull it off again. Here’s what you want: justice. Here’s what you’ll settle for: something equivalent, the quid pro quo.I glanced down at my desk, catching sight of the label on the file of clippings. The label had been neatly typed: Guy Malek, Dispatch Clippings. The two letters from Outhwaite were lined up with the label itself, which is what made me notice for the first time that the lowercase a and the lowercase i were both defective on all three documents. Was that true? I peered closely, picking up my magnifying glass again and scrutinizing the relevant characters. It would take a document expert to prove it, but to me it looked like the letters had been typed on the same machine.I reached for the phone and called the Maleks. In the tiny interval between punching in the number and waiting for it to ring, I was scrambling around in my imagination, trying to conjure up a reason for the call I was making. Shit, shit, shit. Christie picked up on her end, greeting me coolly when I identified myself. I figured she’d talked to Paul Trasatti, but I didn’t dare ask.I said, “I was just looking for Bennet. Is he home, by any chance? I stopped by the restaurant, but he was out somewhere.”“He should be here in a bit. I think he said he was coming home for lunch. You want him to call you?”“I’m not sure he’ll be able to reach me. I’m down at the office, but I’ve got some errands to run. I’ll call back later.”“I’ll pass the message along.” She was using her good-bye tone.I had to launch in with something to keep the conversation afloat. “I talked to Paul this morning. What an odd duck he is. Is he still on medication?”I could hear her focus her attention. “Paul’s on medication? Who told you that? I never heard that,” she said.I let a beat pass. “Uhh, sorry. I didn’t mean to breach anybody’s confidence. Forget I said anything. I just assumed you knew.”“Why bring it up at all? Is there a problem?”“Well, nothing huge. He’s just so paranoid about Jack. He actually sat there and accused me of undermining Jack’s credibility, which couldn’t be further from the truth. Lonnie and I are working our butts off for him.”“Really.”“Then he turned around and called Lonnie. I think he’s probably on another phone rampage, hounding everyone he knows with those wild stories of his. Ah, well. It doesn’t matter. I’m sure he means well, but he’s not doing anybody any favors.”“Is that what you wanted to talk to Bennet about?”“No, that was something different. Lonnie wanted me to verify Bennet’s whereabouts Tuesday night.”“I’m sure he’ll be happy to talk to you. I know he’s told the police and they seem satisfied. I can leave him a note.”“Perfect. I’d appreciate that. Can I ask you about something? You remember the file I borrowed?”“With all the clippings?”“Exactly. I wondered about the label. Did you type that yourself?”“Not me. I never took typing. My mother warned me about that. Bader probably typed the label or he gave it to his secretary. He thought typing was restful. Shows how much he knew.”“That must have been a while ago. I don’t remember seeing a typewriter in his office when I was there.”“He got himself a personal computer a couple of years ago.”“What happened to the typewriter?”“He passed it on to Bennet, I think.”I closed my eyes and stilled my breathing. Christie’s attitude had changed and she was sounding friendly again. I didn’t want to alert her to the importance of the information. “What’d Bennet do with it? That’s not the one he’s using at the restaurant, is it?”“Nuhn-uhn. I doubt it. It’s probably in his room. What’s this about?”“Nothing much. No big deal. Just a little theory of mine, but I’d love to see it sometime. Would it be all right with you if I stopped by to take a look?”“Well, it’s all right with me, but Bennet might object unless he’s here, of course. His room is like the inner sanctum. Nobody goes in there except him. We’re just on our way out. We have an appointment at eleven. Why don’t you ask Bennet when you talk to him?”“I can do that. No problem. That’s a good idea,” I said. “And one more quick question. The night of the murder, could you really see Donovan? Or did you just assume he was watching television because the set was turned on in the other room?”Christie put the phone down without another word.The minute I hung up, I wrote a hasty note to Dietz, put a couple of pieces of blank paper in the file, and shoved it in my handbag. I headed out the side door and took the stairs down to the street, skipping two at a time. I wasn’t sure which “we” had an appointment at eleven, but I was hoping it was Christie and Donovan. If I could get to the Maleks’ before Bennet came home, I could probably bullshit my way upstairs and take a look at the machine. It had occurred to me more than once that Jack or Bennet might be behind the letters and the leak to the press. I couldn’t pinpoint the motivation, but getting a lock on the typewriter would go a long way toward shoring up the connection. I was also thinking teehee on you, Dietz, because I’d told him whoever wrote the letters wouldn’t trash the machine. It’s the same way with guns. Someone will use a handgun in the commission of a crime and instead of disposing of the weapon, he’ll keep it in his closet at home or shove it under the bed. Better to pitch it in the ocean.I reached the Maleks’ in record time, burning up the route I’d driven so many times before. As I approached the estate, I could see the front gates swing open and the nose of a car just appearing around the curve in the drive. I slammed on my brakes and slid into the nearest driveway, fishtailing slightly, my eyes pinned on my rear-view mirror for a moment until the BMW sped past. Donovan was driving, his gaze fixed on the road ahead. I thought I caught sight of Christie, but I couldn’t be sure. I heard a car horn toot and looked out through my windshield. The Maleks’ neighbor, in a dark blue station wagon, was waiting patiently for me to get out of his driveway. I made lots of sheepish gestures as I put my car in reverse. I backed out of the driveway and pulled over to let him pass. I mouthed the word Sorry as he turned to look at me. He smiled and waved, and I waved back at him. Once he was out of sight, I pulled out, crossing the road to the Maleks’ entrance gates.The security guard had been relieved of his duties. I leaned out toward the call box and punched in the gate code Tasha had given me. There was a happy peeping signal. The gates gave a little wiggle and then swung open to admit me. I eased up the driveway and around the curve. Vaguely, it occurred to me that Christie might have stayed home. I’d have to think of a whopper to account for my arrival. Oh, well. Often the best lies are the ones you think up in a pinch.There were no cars in the courtyard, a good sign I thought. Two of the three garages were standing open and both were empty. I had to leave my vehicle out front, but there didn’t seem to be any way around that. If my purpose was legitimate, why would I bother to conceal my car? If the Maleks returned, I’d find a way to fake it. I bypassed the front door and hiked around to the kitchen, pulling the file from my handbag as I rounded the house. Enid was visible through the bay window, standing at the sink. She spotted me and waved, moving toward the backdoor to let me in. She was still drying her hands on a towel when she stepped back, allowing me to precede her into the room.I said, “Hi, Enid. How are you?”“Fine,” she said. “What are you doing coming to the backdoor? You just missed Christie and Donovan going out the front.” She was wearing a big white apron over jeans and a T-shirt and her hair was neatly tucked under a crocheted cap.“Really? I didn’t see them. I rang the front doorbell twice. I guess you couldn’t hear me so I thought I’d come around. I can’t believe I missed them. My timing’s off,” I said.I could see the ingredients for a baking project laid out on the counter: two sticks of butter with the paper removed, a sixteen-ounce measuring cup filled with granulated sugar, a tin of baking powder, and a quart container of whole milk. The oven was preheating and a large springform pan had already been buttered and floured.She returned to the counter where she picked up her sifter and began sifting cake flour into a mountain that had a perfect point on top. While I watched, she used a spatula to scoop more flour. I seldom bake anything and when I do tend to assemble the items as needed, not realizing I’m missing some essential ingredient until I get to the critical moment in the recipe. “Quickly fold in whipped egg whites and finely minced fresh ginger...” Enid was methodical, washing up as she went along. I knew she wouldn’t bake anything from mixes and her cakes would never fall.“Where’d everybody go? I didn’t see any cars in the garages,” I said.“Myrna’s lying down. I imagine she’ll be up in a bit.”“What’s wrong with her? Is she ill?”“I don’t know. She seems worried and I don’t think she’s been sleeping that well.”“Maybe I should talk to her. Where’s everyone else?”“Christie says Bennet’s coming home at lunchtime. She and Donovan went over to the funeral home. The coroner’s office called. The body’s being released this afternoon and they’ve gone to pick out a casket.”“When’s the funeral? Has anybody said?”“They’re talking about Monday, just for family and close friends. It won’t be open to the public.”“I should think not. I’m sure they’ve had their fill of media attention.”“Can I help you with anything?”“Not really. I talked to Christie a while ago and told her I’d be returning this file. She said to stick it in Bader’s office. I can let myself out the front door when I’m done.”“Help yourself,” she said. “Take the back stairs if you want. You know how to find the office?”“Sure. I’ve been up there before. What are you making?”“Lemon pound cake.”“Sounds good,” I said.I trotted up the back stairs, folder in hand, slowing my pace when I reached the top landing. The back hall was utilitarian, floors uncarpeted, windows bare. This mansion was built in an era when the wealthy had live-in servants who occupied nooks and crannies squeezed into wings at the rear of the house, or wedged into attic spaces that were broken up into many small rooms. Cautiously, I opened a door on my left. A narrow stairway ascended into the shadows above. I eased the door shut and moved on, checking into a large linen closet and a cubicle with an ancient commode. The corridor took a ninety-degree turn to the right, opening into the main hall through an archway concealed by heavy damask drapes on a wrought-iron rod.I could see the polished rail of the main stair at the midpoint in the hall. Beyond the stair landing, there was another wing of the house that mirrored the one I was now in. A wide Oriental runner stretched the length of the gloomy hall. At the far end, damask drapes suggested an archway and yet another set of stairs. The wall-paper was subdued, a soft floral pattern repeated endlessly. At intervals, tulip-shaped crystal fixtures were mounted on the walls. They’d probably been installed when the house was built and converted at some point from gas to electricity.There were three doors on my left, each sealed with an enormous X of crime scene tape. I had to guess that one door led to Guy’s bedroom, one to Jack’s, and one to the bathroom that connected the two. On the right, there were two more doors. I knew the second was Bader’s suite: bedroom, bath, and home office. The door closest to me was closed. I flicked a look behind me, making sure Enid hadn’t followed. The whole house was silent. I put my hand on the knob and turned it with care. Locked.Well, now what? The lock was the simple old-fashioned type requiring a skeleton key that probably fit every door up here. I scanned the hall in both directions. I didn’t have time to waste. Bader’s suite was closest. I did a race-walk to his bedroom and tried the knob. This room was unlocked. I peered around the door. There was a key protruding neatly from the keyhole on the other side. I extracted it and hurried back to Bennet’s room. I jammed the key in the lock and tried turning it. I could feel the key hang, but there was some tolerance to the lock. I applied steady pressure while I jiggled the door gently. It took close to thirty seconds, but the key gave way suddenly and I was in.
