---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "M Is for Malice - index_split_020.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - M Is for Malice"
tags: ["said", "know", "letter", "like", "trasatti", "one", "guy", "back", "could", "patty", "jack", "donovan", "maybe", "name", "would", "might", "dietz", "never", "see", "right", "two", "hand", "outhwaite", "way", "thought"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/MIsforMalice-indexsplit020html

---


Unknown
NINETEENOnce back at Malek Construction, I left Donovan in the parking lot and picked up my car. I was feeling anxious and confused. This Max Outhwaite business made no sense at all. Maybe Dietz had come up with a line on him. Throw the Maddisons into the mix and what did it add up to? I glanced at my watch, wincing when I saw how late it was. The trip up the pass had taken more than an hour and a half.Dietz was waiting in front of the public library. I pulled over to the curb and he slid into the passenger seat. “Sorry I’m late,” I said.“Don’t worry about it. I got news for you. Outhwaite’s a myth. I checked the city directories for the last twenty-five years and then went across the street and checked the County Clerk’s office. No one by that name was ever listed in the phone book or anywhere else. No marriages, no deaths, no real property, building permits, lawsuits, you name it. Everybody alive leaves a trail of some kind. The name has to be phony unless we’re missing a bet.”“There is a connection, but it’s not what you’d expect,” I said. I filled him in on my conversation with Donovan while we headed for home. I’d forgotten how nice it was to have someone to consult. I told him about the Maddisons and Guy’s alleged involvement in the family’s downfall. “Maxwell Outhwaite was the name used by the fictitious appraiser who stole fifty thousand dollars’ worth of rare documents. I’m not convinced it was Guy, but Donovan seems to take it for granted. Now, honestly,” I said. “If you’d known about the Maddisons, wouldn’t you have told someone?”“Namely you?”“Well, yes, me,” I said. “Donovan could have mentioned it. Same with Max Outhwaite. The name pops up again years later-why didn’t he tell someone?”“Maybe Katzenbach never told him there was a letter and that Outhwaite was the name of the sender.”“Oh. I see what you’re saying. I guess it’s possible,” I said. “It still annoys me no end. I wish we could find the typewriter. That would be a coup.”“Forget it. There’s no way.”“What makes you say that? It has to be around here somewhere. Someone typed both those letters on the same machine.”“So what? If I were writing poison-pen notes, I’d hardly sit at my desk and use my own IBM. I’m too paranoid for that. I’d use one of the rental typewriters at the public library. Or maybe find a place selling typewriters and use one of theirs.”“This machine isn’t new. The typeface has an old-fashioned look to it and a lot of the letters are clogged. It’s probably got a fabric ribbon instead of carbon film.”“Those typewriters at the library aren’t exactly hot off the assembly line.”“Pick me up some samples and we’ll do a comparison. There are a couple of typeface defects that should help us pin it down. I’m sure a document expert could find others. I’ve only eyeballed it.”“The clogged letters don’t mean much. Go after ’em with cleaning fluid and poof, those are gone.”“Sure, but don’t you think the majority of people who write anonymous letters assume they’re safe from discovery?”“They might assume they’re safe, but they’re not,” Dietz said. “The FBI maintains extensive files of anonymous letters. Plus, they have samples of type from most known machines. Post Office does, too, and so does the Treasury Department. They can determine the make and model of almost any machine. That’s how they nail cranks, especially people who send threatening letters to public officials. The only way to play it safe is to dismantle the machine.”“Yeah, but who’s going to trash a typewriter? If you thought you were safe enough to use your own machine, you wouldn’t turn around and toss it in the garbage afterward. And in this case, why bother? Those letters were a nuisance, but hardly actionable.”Dietz smiled. “What, you picture it sitting out on someone’s desk?”“Maybe. It’s possible.”“Keep an eye out.”“I know you’re just saying that to humor me,” I said.“What else did Donovan have to say about the Maddisons?”“Not much. He claims they’re all gone, but I don’t think we should take his word for it.”“It’s worth pursuing,” Dietz said. “As stories go, it’s not bad.”“What do you mean, ‘it’s not bad’? I think it’s fabulous. I mean, talk about a motive for murder. It’s the best lead we’ve had-”“The only lead,” he pointed out.I ignored the obvious. “On top of that, we have Outhwaite, who seems to tie right back to them:”“Shouldn’t be too hard to track down the name Maddison with two d’s. Even if they’re not local, they had to come from somewhere.”“Donovan says the father died around Thanksgiving of 1967 and Patty followed, probably in May or June of 1968. The mother died five years later, but that’s as much as I know. You may not find Claire at all. He says she moved back to the East Coast and married. He does remember reading about her death in the local paper, so there must have been a notice in the Dispatch. Maybe she kept her maiden name?”“I’ll get on it first thing.”“You will? I can’t believe you’re volunteering. I thought you hated doing this stuff.”“Good practice. It’s nice to keep a hand in. This way I know I haven’t lost my touch,” he said. “We might try the newspaper morgue if we can get Katzenbach’s cooperation. They might have old clips on the Maddisons along with the obits.”“That’s a sexy suggestion.”“I’m a sexy guy,” he said.When we got home, I changed into my sweats in preparation for jogging. I had slept through my usual six A.m. run and I was feeling the effects. I left Dietz in the living room with his leg propped up, icing his bum knee while he flipped from channel to channel, alternately watching CNN, talk shows, and obscure sporting events. I headed out the front door, thankful for the opportunity to spend time alone.There was scarcely any breeze coming off the ocean. The late-afternoon sun had begun to fade, but the daylong baked beach was still throwing off heat saturated by the smell of kelp and brine. The fronds of the palm trees looked like construction paper cutouts, flat dark shapes against the flat blue sky. I lengthened my stride, running at a pace that felt good. The stiffness and fatigue gradually gave way to ease. My muscles became liquid and sweat trickled down my face. Even the burning in my chest felt good as my body was flooded with oxygen. At the end of the run, I flung myself down on the grass, where I lay panting. My mind was a blank and my bones were washed clean. Finally, my breathing slowed and the run-generated heat in my body seeped out. I did a series of stretches and then roused myself. As I headed for home, I could feel the return of the Santa Ana winds lofting down the mountainside. I showered and changed clothes, throwing on a T-shirt and jeans.Dietz and I had dinner up at Rosie’s. William was working behind the bar again. At the age of eighty-seven, this was like a whole new career for him. Since their marriage, the two of them had settled into a comfortable routine. More and more, Rosie seemed to be turning management over to him. She’d always maintained tight control of the day-to-day operation, but William had persuaded her to pay decent wages and as a consequence, she’d been able to hire better employees. And she’d begun to delegate responsibility, which gave her more time to spend with him. William had given up some of his imaginary illnesses and she’d surrendered some of her authoritarianism. Their affection for each other was obvious and their occasional spats seemed to blow over without incident. Dietz was talking to William about Germany, but I was only half attentive, wondering if the two of us would ever reach an accommodation. I pictured Dietz at eighty-seven, me a comparatively youthful seventy-two; retired from the stresses of private-eye work, riddled with arthritis; bereft of our teeth. What would we do, open a private detective school?“What are you thinking? You look odd,” he said.“Nothing. Retirement.”“I’d rather eat my gun.”At bedtime, Dietz offered to hobble up the spiral stairs. “My knee’s killing me again so I’m probably not much good except for company,” he said.“You’re better off downstairs. My bed’s not big enough, especially with that knee of yours. I’d just lie there worrying I’d bump you wrong.”I left him below opening up the sofa bed while I ambled up the stairs, talking to him over the rail.“Last chance,” he said, smiling up at me.“I’m not sure it’s smart getting used to you.”“You should take advantage while you can.”I paused, looking down. “That’s the difference between us in a nutshell, Dietz.”“Because I live in the moment?”“Because for you that’s enough.”First thing Friday morning, Dietz took his car and headed over to the Santa Teresa Dispatch offices while I drove to Paul Trasatti’s house. Hopper Road was located midway between the Maleks’ and the country club. The neighborhood was small, the street lined with elm trees and dappled with shade. The house was built in the style of an English country cottage, the sort you’d see pictured on a deck of playing cards; gray stone with a thatched roof that undulated like an ocean wave where the gables appeared. The windows were small paned, leaded glass, the wood trim and the shutters painted white. Two narrow stone chimneys bracketed the house like a pair of matching bookends. The yard was enclosed with a white picket fence, pink and red hollyhocks planted along the front. The small yard was immaculate, thick grass bordered in dark ivy with small flowerbeds along the brick walk leading to the door. Birds twittered in the young oak growing at the corner of the property.I’d called the night before, of course, wanting to be certain Trasatti would be home. Even on the porch, I could smell bacon and eggs and the scent of maple syrup. My whimper probably wasn’t audible above the sound of the mower two doors down. In response to my ring, Trasatti came to the door with his napkin in hand. He was tall and thin, as bald as a light bulb. He had a large nose, thick glasses, and a jutting chin. His chest was narrow, slightly sunken, swelling to a thickened waistline. He wore a white dress shirt and a pair of stovepipe pants. He frowned at me, looking at his watch with surprise. “You said, nine.”“It is nine.”“This says eight.” He held his watch to his ear. “Shit. Come on in. You caught me at breakfast. Have a seat in here. I’ll be back in a second. You want coffee?”“I’m fine. Take your time,” I said.The living room was small and perfectly appointed, more like a doctor’s office than a place to put your feet up. The furniture had a vaguely Victorian air, though to my untutored eye, it didn’t appear to be the real thing. The chairs were small and fussy, rimmed with carved wooden fruit. There were three dark wood tables topped with pink-veined marble slabs, an array of Sotheby’s catalogs neatly lined up on one. The carpeting was a short-cut wool pile, pale blue with a border of Chinese dragons and chrysanthemums. Two cloisonné vases were filled with artificial pink and blue flowers of some generic sort. A clock on the mantel had a second hand that clicked distinctly as it inched its way around. I leafed through a Sotheby’s catalog, but didn’t see much of interest except a letter from the Marquis de Sade, which was being offered at two thousand dollars. The passage quoted was in French and seemed petulant. There was also a pretty little greeting from Erik Satie to Mme Ravel with “decorated borders and raised blind relief heading showing in Colour two hands held in front of a rose...” Lots of talk about “jolies fleurs” and “respecteusements.” My thoughts exactly. I’ve often said as much.I strolled the perimeter, taking in numerous framed letters and autographs. Laurence Sterne, Franz Liszt, William Henry Harrison, Jacob Broom (whoever he was), Juan Jose Flores (ditto). There was a long, incomprehensible letter bearing the signature S. T. Coleridge, and some kind of receipt or order blank signed by George Washington. There was another letter written in a crabbed hand, dated August 1710, fraught with brown ink and cross-outs and looking crumpled and stained. Who’d had the presence of mind to save all this litter? Were there people with foresight going through the dustbins back then?Across the hall, I could see what must have been a dining room done up as an office. There were bookshelves on every wall, some extending across the windows, which greatly diminished the incoming light. Every surface was stacked ten deep, including tables, chairs, and floors. No typewriter on the premises as far as I could see. I had no reason to think Trasatti was involved, but it would have been nice to have a piece of the puzzle fall into place. The air smelled of old dust and book mold, glue, aging paper, and dust mites. A large tortoiseshell cat picked its way daintily across a desk piled with books. This creature had only a stump for a tail and looked like it might be searching out a place to pee.“Making yourself at home?” came the voice behind me.I started, making ever so slight a leap.“I was admiring this enormous cat,” I said casually.“Sorry if I startled you. That’s Lady Chatterley.”“What happened to her tail?”“She’s a Manx.”“She looks like a character,” I said. Animal people seem to love it when you say things like this. Trasatti didn’t seem to warm to it. He gestured me into the office, where he took a seat at his desk, pushing aside an irregular stack of hardback books.“No secretary?” I asked.“Business isn’t big enough for clerical help. Anything I need done, I use the Mac upstairs. Go ahead and make a space for yourself,” he said, indicating the only chair in the room.“Thanks.” I placed some books, a briefcase, and a pile of newspapers on the floor, and sat down.“Now what can I help you with? I really can’t add to what I’ve already given you in regard to Jack,” he said.“This was in regard to something else,” I said while the fifteen-pound cat hopped onto my lap and settled between my knees. Up close, Lady Chatterley smelled like a pair of damp two-week-old socks. I scratched that little spot just above the base of its tail which made the back end of the cat rise up until its rosebud was staring me in the face. I pushed the back end down. I peppered my preface with lots of reassuring phrases “off the record,” “just between us,” and other felicitous expressions of confidentiality-before getting down to business. “I’m wondering what you can tell me about the Maddisons-Patty and her sister, Claire.”He seemed to take the question in stride. “What would you like to know?”“Anything you care to tell,” I said.Paul straightened the stack of books in front of him, making sure all the edges were aligned and the top right-hand corners matched. “I didn’t know the sister. She was older than we were. She was off at college by the time the family moved into the area and Patty started hanging out with Guy.”“The Maddisons were new in town?”“Well no, not really. They’d been living out in Colgate and bought a house closer in. They never had the kind of money we did, the rest of us-not that we were wealthy,” he added. “Bader Malek did well back in those days, but he wasn’t what you’d call rich.”“Tell me about Patty.”“She was pretty. Dark.” He put his hand at eye level, indicating bangs. “Hair down to here,” he said. “She’d kind of peer out like this. She was strange, lots of phobias and nervous mannerisms. Bad posture, big tits. She chewed her nails to the quick and liked to stick herself with things.” Trasatti put his hands in his lap, trying not to touch the items on his desk.“She stuck herself? With what?”“Needles. Pencils. Safety pins. I saw her burn herself one time. She put a lighted cigarette on her hand-casually, like it was happening to someone else. She never even flinched, but I could smell cooked flesh.”“Was Guy serious about her?” I pushed the cat’s hind end down again and it began to work its claws into the knees of my jeans.“She was serious about him. I have no idea what he thought of her.”“What about the others? Donovan and Bennet.”“What about them?”“I just wondered what they were up to during this period.”“Donovan was working for his dad, as I remember. He was always working for his dad, so that’s a safe bet. Jack was back at school by then, so he was only home on occasion. Christmas and spring break.”“And his mother’s funeral,” I said. I extracted the cat’s claws from my knee and held its right paw between my fingers. I could feel its claws protrude and retract, but the cat seemed content, probably thinking about mice. “What about Bennet? Where was he?”“Here in town. He and I were both finishing at UCST ““Majoring in what?”“My major was art history. His was economics or business, maybe public finance. He switched around some. I forget.”“Did it surprise you when Patty turned up pregnant?”Trasatti snorted, shaking his head. “Patty would screw anyone. She was desperate for attention and we were happy to oblige.”“Really,” I said. “Donovan never said she was promiscuous.”“She wasn’t the only one. There was lots of screwing in those days. Free love, we called it. We were all smoking dope. Bunch of small-town hippies, or as close as we could get. We were always horny and hungry. Half the girls we hung out with were as fat as pigs. Except for Patty, of course, who was gorgeous, but whacked out.”“Nice of you boys to help yourselves to a minor,” I said. “Given her loose ways, how’d you know the baby was Guy’s?”“Because she said it was.”“She could have lied. If she was crazy and stoned, she might have made things up. How do you know the baby wasn’t yours?”Trasatti shifted uncomfortably. “I had no money to speak of. Where’s the benefit in claiming it’s mine? The Maleks had class. She might have been crazy, but she wasn’t stupid. It’s like the old joke-”“I know the old joke,” I said. “Was there ever any proof? Did anybody run blood tests to establish paternity?”“I hardly think so. I’m sure they didn’t. This was sixty-eight.”“How do you know Guy wasn’t blamed because it was convenient? He was gone by then. Who better to accuse than a chronic screw-up like him?”Trasatti picked up a pencil and then put it down. His expression had gone blank. “What does this have to do with Jack? I thought you were working to try to get him off.”“That’s what I’m doing.”“Doesn’t sound like that to me.”“Donovan told me about Patty yesterday. I thought the story might pertain, so I’m following up. Did you ever see the letters Guy allegedly forged?”“Why put it that way? It’s what he did.”“Did you actually see him do it?”“No, of course not.”“Then it’s all supposition. Did you ever see the letters?”“Why would I?”“Your father did the appraisal when the forgeries were discovered. I thought he might have showed you the copies, if he was training you to follow in his footsteps.”“Who told you that?”“He handed the business over to you, didn’t he?”Trasatti smiled at me, blinking. “I don’t understand where you intend to go with this. Are you accusing me of something?”“Not at all,” I said.“Because if you are, you’re out of line.”“That wasn’t an accusation. I never said you did anything. I’m saying Guy Malek didn’t. I’m saying someone else did it all and blamed him. What about ‘Max Outhwaite’? How does he fit in?”“Outhwaite?”“Come on, Trasatti. That’s the name Guy supposedly used on his fake business cards.”“Right, right, right. I remember now. Sure thing. I knew it sounded familiar. What’s the link?”“That’s why I’m asking you. I don’t know,” I said. “I think the story of Patty Maddison ties in somehow. Her death, the forged letters. I’m just fishing around.”“You better try something else. The family’s gone.”“What makes you so sure?”Paul Trasatti was silent. He began to arrange a row of paper clips on the side of a magnetized holder on his desk. Each one had to be exactly the same distance from the one above it and the one below.“Come on. Just between us,” I said.“I tried to find them once.”“When was this?”“About ten years ago.”“Really,” I said, trying not to seem interested. “What was that about?”“I was curious. I thought there might be other rare documents. You know, passed down to other members of the family.”“How’d you go about it?”“I hired a genealogist. I said I was trying to find some long lost relatives. This gal did a search. She took months. She traced the name back to England, but on this end-the California branch-there weren’t any male heirs and the line died out.”“What about aunts, uncles, cousins...?”“The parents were both the only children of only children. There was no one left.”“What happened to the copies of the documents?”“The forgeries were destroyed.”“And the originals?”“No one’s ever seen them again. Well, I haven’t in any case. They’ve never come up for sale in all the years I’ve done business.”“Do you know what they were?”“I have the itemized list. My dad kept meticulous records. You want to see it?”“I’d love to.”Trasatti got up and crossed to a closet. I caught a glimpse of a wall safe and four gray metal file cabinets. Above them, on shelves, there was a series of old-fashioned card files. “I’m going to get all this on computer one of these days.” He seemed to know right where he was going and I wondered if this was something he’d done recently. He extracted a card, glanced at it briefly, and then closed the drawer again. He left the closet door ajar and returned to his desk, handing me the card as he passed my chair. The cat had gone to sleep, lying across my knees like a fifteen-pound bag of hot sand.The list detailed six documents: a framed Society of Boston Membership Certificate and a personal letter, both signed by George Washington and valued at $11,500 and $9,500, respectively; a judicial writ signed by Abraham Lincoln, dated December 1847, valued at $6,500; a wartime document signed by John Hancock, valued at $5,500; a ten-page fragment from an original manuscript by Arthur Conan Doyle valued at $7,500; and a letter signed by John Adams, valued at $9,000.“I’m impressed,” I said. “I don’t know beans about rare documents, but these seem fabulous.”“They are. Those prices you’re looking at are twenty years out of date. They’d be worth more today.”“How did Patty Maddison’s father get his hands on items like these?”“Nobody really knows. He was an amateur collector. He picked some up at auction and the rest, who knows? He might have stolen them for all I know. My fathered heard about ’em, but Francis-Mr. Maddison-would never let him examine them.”“His widow must have been an idiot to hand ’em over the way she did.”Trasatti made no comment.“How did Guy hear about the letters?” I asked.“Patty probably told him.”“Why would she do that?”“How do I know? Showing off. She was nuts. She did all kinds of weird things.”I saw him glance at his watch. “You have an appointment?” I asked.“As a matter of fact, I’m hoping we can wrap this up. I have work to do.”“Five minutes more and I’ll be on my way.”Trasatti shifted restlessly, but motioned me on.“Let me try out a little theory. None of this came to light until after Guy took off, right?”Trasatti stared at me, without offering encouragement.I was forced to go on, feeling like Perry Mason in a courtroom confrontation, only this wasn’t going as well as his always did. “So maybe Jack was the one who got Patty knocked up. I heard Jack was the randy one. According to Guy, he screwed anything that moved.”“I told you he was off at college. He wasn’t even here,” Trasatti said.“He came back for his mother’s funeral and again for spring break. That was March, wasn’t it?”“I really don’t remember.”“As I understand it, Guy had hit the road by then. Jack felt betrayed. He was crushed that Guy’d left without him so maybe he turned to Patty for consolation. At that point, she must have needed comfort as much as he did.”Trasatti kept his face expressionless, his laced together on the desk. “You’re never going to get me to say anything about this.”“Jack could have forged the letters. You two were buddies. Your father was an appraiser. You could have cooked up the scheme yourself and showed Jack how to do it.”“I’m finding this offensive. It’s pure speculation. It doesn’t mean a thing.”I let that one slide, though what he said was true. “Everything was cool until Guy came home again.”“What difference would that make?”“In the old days, Guy took the blame for everybody’s sins, so it just stands to reason everyone felt safe until he showed up again.”“I’m not following.”“Maybe the motive for Guy’s murder was never money,” I said. “Maybe Jack was just trying to protect himself.”“From what? I don’t get it. There’s really nothing at stake. The theft was eighteen years ago. The statute of limitations has run out. There’s no crime on the books. Even if your guess is correct, Jack’s the one, who ends up with his ass in a sling. You said you were here to help, but it’s blowing right back on him.”“You know what? Here’s the truth. I don’t really give a shit what blows back on him. If he’s guilty, so be it. That isn’t my concern.”“Well, that’s nice. You want me to pick up the phone and call Lonnie Kingman? He’s going to love your attitude and so will Jack. As far as I know, he’s the one paying your bills.”“You go right ahead. Lonnie can always fire me if he doesn’t like what I’m doing.”
