---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "M Is for Malice - index_split_014.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - M Is for Malice"
tags: ["said", "guy", "tasha", "christie", "one", "car", "back", "could", "see", "like", "turned", "room", "want", "know", "would", "day", "donovan", "went", "looked", "jonah", "night", "found", "going", "morning", "house"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/MIsforMalice-indexsplit014html

---


Unknown
THIRTEENGuy Malek was killed sometime Tuesday night, though I didn’t actually hear about it until Wednesday afternoon. I’d spent most of the day over at the courthouse sitting in on the trial of a man accused of embezzlement. I hadn’t been associated with the case-undercover cops had nailed him after seven months of hard work-but some years before, I’d done surveillance on him briefly at the request of his wife. She suspected he was cheating, but she wasn’t sure with whom. Turned out he was having an affair with her sister and she broke off relations with both. The man was dishonest to the core and I confess I found it entertaining to watch the legal system grind away at him. As often as I complain about the shortage of justice in this world, I find it infinitely satisfying when the process finally works as it should.When I got back to the office after court adjourned, there was a message from Tasha waiting on my machine. I noticed, in passing, it was the Maleks’ number she’d left. I called, expecting to have Myrna pick up. Instead Tasha answered as if she’d been manning the phones. The minute I heard her, I realized how irritated I was that she’d gone out of town just as Guy arrived. If she’d been doing her job, she might have steered the family off their campaign of pressure and harassment.Smart mouth that I am, I launched right in. “At long last,” I said, “it’s. about time you got back. All hell’s broken loose. Have you heard what’s going on? Well, obviously you have or you wouldn’t be there. Honestly, I adore Guy, but I can’t stand the rest of ’em-”Tasha cut in, her voice flat. “Kinsey, that’s why I called. I cut my trip short and flew back from Utah this afternoon. Guy is dead.”I was silent for a beat, trying to parse the sentence. I knew the subject... Guy... but the predicate... is dead... made no immediate sense. “You’re kidding. What happened? He can’t be dead. When I saw him on Monday he was fine.”“He was murdered last night. Somebody smashed his skull with a blunt instrument. Christie found him in bed this morning when he didn’t come down for breakfast. The police took one look at the crime scene and got a warrant to search the premises. The house has been swarming with cops ever since. They haven’t found the murder weapon, but they suspect it’s here. They’re still combing the property.”I kept getting hung up about two sentences back. “Somebody killed him in bed? While he slept?”“It looks that way.”“That’s disgusting. That’s awful. You can’t be serious.”“I’m sorry to spring it on you, but there isn’t any nice way to put it. It is disgusting. It’s terrible. We’re all numb.”“Has anybody been arrested?”“Not at this point,” she said. “The family’s doing what they can to cooperate, but it doesn’t look good.”“Tasha, I don’t believe this. I’m sick.”“I am too. A colleague called me in Utah this morning after Donovan called him. I left everything behind and got myself on a plane.”“Who do they suspect?”“I have no idea. From what I’ve heard, Jack and Bennet were both out last night. Christie went to bed early and Donovan was watching TV upstairs in their sitting room. Myrna’s apartment is off the kitchen in back, but she says she was dead to the world and didn’t hear anything. She’s currently down at the station being interviewed. Christie came in a little while ago. She says the detectives are still talking to Donovan. Hang on.”She put a hand across the mouthpiece and I heard her in a muffled discussion with someone in the background. She came back on the line, saying, “Great. I just talked to the homicide detective in charge of things here. He wants to keep the phone line open, but says if you want to come over he’ll tell the guys at the gate to let you in. I told him he ought to talk to you since you were the one who found Guy in the first place. I told him you might have something to contribute.”“I doubt that, but who knows? I’ll be there in fifteen minutes. Do you need anything?”“We’re fine for the moment. If no one’s at the gate, the code is 1-9-2-4. Just punch the number in at the call box beside the drive. See you shortly,” she said.I grabbed my blazer and my handbag and went out to my car. The day had been mild. The high winds had moved on, taking with them the unseasonable heat. The light was waning and as soon as the sun set, the temperatures would drop. I was already chilled and I shrugged into my blazer before I slid beneath the wheel. Earlier in the day, I’d tried to use my wipes and washer fluid to clean the dust off my windshield and now it was streaked in a series of rising half moons. The hood of my car was covered with the same fine layer of dust, as pale as powder, and just as soft by the look of it. Even the seat upholstery had a gritty feel to it.I put my hands together on the steering wheel and leaned my forehead against them. I had absolutely no feeling. My interior process was held in suspended animation, as if the Pause button had been pushed on some remote control. How was it possible Guy Malek was gone? For the past week, he’d been such a presence in my life. He’d been both lost and found. He’d occupied my thoughts, triggering reactions of sympathy and exasperation. Now I couldn’t quite remember his face only a flash here and there, the sound of his “Hey,” the whiskery brush of his chin on my cheek. He was already as insubstantial as a ghost, all form without content, a series of fragmented images without permanence.What seemed so odd was that life just went on. I could see traffic passing along Cabana Boulevard. Two doors away, my neighbor raked brittle leaves into a pile on his lawn. If I turned on the car radio, there’d be intervals of music, public service announcements, commercials, and news broadcasts. Guy Malek might not even be mentioned on some stations. I’d lived my entire day without any intuition that Guy had been murdered, no tremor whatsoever in my subterranean landscape. So what’s life about? Are people not really dead until we’ve been irrefutably informed? It felt that way to me, as though Guy had, just this moment, been jettisoned out of this world and into the next.I turned the key in the ignition. Every ordinary act seemed fraught with novelty. My perceptions had changed, and with them many of my assumptions about my personal safety. If Guy could be murdered, why not Henry, or me? I drove on automatic pilot while the street scenes slid past. Familiar neighborhoods looked odd and there was a moment when I couldn’t recall with any certainty what town I was in.Approaching the Maleks’, I could see that traffic had increased. Cars filled with the curious cruised by the estate. Heads were turned almost comically in the same direction. There were cars parked on both sides of the road out front. Tires had chewed into the grass, plowing down bushes and crushing the stray saplings. As each new car appeared, the assembled crowd would turn, craning and peering to see if it was someone of note.My car didn’t seem to generate a lot of interest at first. I guess nobody could believe the Maleks would drive a VW bug, especially one like mine, with its dust and assorted dings. It was only when I pulled up at the gate and gave my name to the guard that the reporters surged forward, trying to catch a glimpse of me. They seemed to be fresh troops. I didn’t recognize anyone from my earlier trip over.Somehow the national media had already managed to get camera crews assembled, and I knew that by seven the next morning, someone closely associated with the Maleks would be seen in a three-minute interview. I don’t know how the major networks make arrangements so quickly. It was one of the miracles of technology that less than twenty-four hours after Guy Malek’s death, somebody would do a close-up of a tear-stained face, maybe Christie’s or Myrna’s or even Enid’s, the cook I’d yet to meet.There was a black-and-white patrol car parked to one side, along with a vehicle from a private firm. I spotted the security guard pacing along the road, trying to keep the crowd from moving in too close. A uniformed police officer checked my name on his clipboard and waved me in. The gate swung inward by degrees and I idled the engine until the gap was sufficient to ease through. In that brief interval, there were strangers knocking on my car window, yelling questions in my direction. With their various handheld mikes extended, they might have been offering gimcracks for sale. I kept my eyes straight ahead. When I pulled forward through the gate, two male reporters continued to trot alongside me like cut-rate Secret Service agents. The security guard and the cop both converged, cutting off their progress. In my rearview mirror, I could see them begin to argue with the officer, probably reciting their moral, legal, and Constitutional rights.My heart rate picked up as I eased up the driveway toward the house. I could see five or six uniformed officers prowling across the property, eyes on the ground as if hunting for four-leaved clovers. Light tended to fade rapidly at this hour of the day. Shadows were already collecting beneath the trees. Soon they’d need flashlights to continue the search. There was a second uniformed officer posted at the front door, his face impassive. He walked out to meet my car and I rolled down my window. I gave him my name and watched him scan both his list and my face. Apparently satisfied, he stepped away from the car. In the courtyard to my left, there were already numerous cars jammed into the cobblestone turnaround. “Any place in here all right?”“You can park in the rear. Then come around and use the front door to go in,” he said, and motioned me on.“Thanks.”I pulled around to the left and parked my car at the far end of the three-car garage. In the diminishing light, a cluster of three floods, activated by motion sensors, flashed on to signal my presence. Except for the kitchen on this end of the house and the library on the other, most of the windows along the front of the house were dark. Around the front, the exterior lighting seemed purely decorative, too pale to provide a welcome in the accumulating gloom.The uniformed police officer opened the door for me and I passed into the foyer. The library door was ajar and a shaft of light defined one pie-shaped wedge of the wood parquet floor. Given the quiet in the house, I was guessing the technicians were gone-fingerprint experts, the photographer, the crime scene artist, coroner, and paramedics. Tasha appeared in the doorway. “I saw you pull in. How’re you doing?”I said “Fine” in a tone that encouraged her to keep her distance from me. I noticed I was feeling churlish, as much with her as with circumstance. Homicide makes me angry with its sly tricks and disguises. I wanted Guy Malek back and with some convoluted emotional logic, I blamed her for what had happened. If she hadn’t been my cousin, she wouldn’t have, hired me in the first place. If I hadn’t been hired, I wouldn’t have found him, wouldn’t even have known who he was, wouldn’t have cared,, and would have felt no loss. She knew this as well as I did and the flicker of guilt that crossed her face was a mirror to mine.For someone who’d flown back from her vacation in haste, Tasha was flawlessly turned out. She wore a black gabardine pantsuit with a jacket cropped at the waist. The slim, uncuffed trousers had a wide waistband and inverted pleats in front. The jacket had brass buttons and the sleeves were trimmed with a thin gold braid. Somehow the outfit suggested something more than fashion. She looked crisp, authoritative, and diminutive, the dainty, MP of lawyers here to keep matters straight.I followed her into the library with its clusters of dark red cracked leather chairs. The red Oriental carpets looked drab at this hour. The tall leaded glass windows were tinted with the gray cast of twilight, as chilly as frost. Tasha paused to turn on table lamps as she crossed the room. Even the luster of the dark wood paneling failed to lend coziness to the cold stone hearth. The room was shabby and smelled as musty as I remembered it. I’d first met Bennet here just a week ago.I left my handbag beside a club chair and circled the room restlessly. “Who’s the chief investigator? You said there was someone here.”“Lieutenant Robb.”“Jonah? Oh, terrific. How perfect.”“You know him?”“I know Jonah,” I said. When I’d met him, he was working Missing Persons, but the Santa Teresa Police Department has a mandatory rotation system and detectives get, moved around. With Lieutenant Dolan’s retirement, there was an opening for a homicide investigator. I’d had a short-lived affair with Jonah once when he was separated from his wife, a frequent occurrence in the course of their stormy relationship. They’d been sweethearts since seventh grade and were no doubt destined to be together for life, like owls, except for the intervals of virulent estrangement coming every ten months. I suppose the pattern should have been evident, but I was smitten with him. Later, not surprisingly, she crooked her little finger and he went back to her. Occasionally now, the three of us crossed paths out in public and I’d become an expert at pretending I’d never, dallied with him between my Wonder Woman sheets. This probably accounted for his willingness to have me on the scene. He knew he could trust me to keep my mouth shut.“What’s the story?” she asked.“Nothing. Just skip it. I feel bitchy, I guess, but I shouldn’t take it out on you.”I heard footsteps on the stairs and looked up as Christie came in. She wore bulky running shoes and a warm-up suit in some silky material; the blue of the fabric setting off the blue in her eyes. She wore scarcely any makeup and I wondered if this was the outfit she was wearing when Guy’s body was discovered. The library, like the living room, was equipped with a wet bar: a small brass sink, a mini refrigerator, an ice bucket, and a tray of assorted liquor bottles. She moved over to the fridge and removed a chilled bottle of white wine. “Anybody want a glass of wine? What about you, Kinsey?”I said, “Alcohol won’t help.”“Don’t be absurd. Of course it will. So does Valium. It doesn’t change reality, but it improves your attitude. Tasha? Can I interest you in a glass of Chardonnay? This is top of the line.” She turned the bottle so she could peer at the price tag on the side. “Nice. This is $36.95.”“I’ll have some in a bit. Not just yet,” Tasha said.Mutely, the two of us watched while Christie cut the foil cap from a wine bottle and used a corkscrew. “If I smoked, I’d have a ciggie, but I don’t,” she said. She poured herself some wine, the bottle clinking clumsily on the rim of the Waterford crystal. “Shit!” she said, pausing to inspect the damage. A jagged crack ran down the side. She dumped the contents in the sink and tossed the glass in the trash. She picked up a second glass and poured again. “We need a fire in here. I wish Donovan were home.”“I can do that,” I said. I moved over to the hearth and removed the fire screen. There were six or seven hefty pieces of firewood in a brass carrier. I picked up one and chunked it onto the grate.“Make sure you don’t destroy any evidence,” she said.I looked up at her blankly.“Ted Bundy killed one of his victims with a hunk of wood,” she said, and then shrugged with embarrassment. “Never mind. Not funny. What a day,” she said. “I can’t figure out how to handle it. I’ve felt drunk since this morning, completely out of control.”I stacked two more logs on the grate while she and Tasha talked. It was a relief to be involved in a task that was basic and inconsequential. The wood was beautifully seasoned oak. Most of the heat would go straight up the chimney, but it would be a comfort nonetheless. I flicked on the electric match, turned the key in the gas starter, and listened to the comforting whunk as the jets ignited. I replaced the fire screen, pausing to adjust the height of the flame. Belatedly, I tuned into their conversation.Tasha was saying, “Did you ask to have an attorney present?”“Of course I didn’t ask for an attorney. I didn’t do anything. This was just routine,” Christie said irritably. She remained standing behind the bar, leaning against its leather surface. “Sorry. What’s the matter with me? I’m completely frazzled.”“Don’t worry about it. Who’s still down there?”“Jack and Bennet, I think. They kept everybody separated like they did here. So absurd. What do they think, Donovan and I aren’t going to discuss it in detail the minute we can put our heads together?”“They don’t want to risk your influencing one another,” I said. “Memory’s fragile. It’s easily contaminated.”“None of us have anything much to report,” she said. “I drank too much at dinner and fell asleep by nine. Donovan was watching TV in the sitting room off our bedroom.”“What about Guy?”“He went up to bed about the same time I did. He was drunk as all get-out thanks to Bennet’s martinis.”She caught sight of her fingertips and frowned to herself. She turned away from us and ran water in the sink. “They took prints for comparison.”Tasha directed a brief comment to me. “After the body was removed and the fingerprint techs were finished, the homicide investigator had one of the Maleks’ housecleaning crew come over and walk through Guy’s room with him describing the usual position of furniture, lamps, ashtrays, that sort of thing.”“Did they find anything?”“I have no idea. I’m sure she was cautioned to keep her mouth shut. I know they tagged and bagged a bunch of items, but I don’t know exactly what or why they were significant. Now they’ve brought in additional officers and started a grid search of the grounds. Apparently, they spent a lot of time down in the pool house earlier.”Christie broke in. “I could. see them from up in my room checking perimeter gates, any point of entrance or exit.”“They’re still out there on the property. I noticed that when I came in. But why check the exterior? It almost had to be someone in the house.”Christie bristled. “Not necessarily. What makes you say that? We have people all over. Maybe fifteen a week, with the gardeners and the car washers, housecleaners, and the woman who takes care of the plants. We have no idea where those people come from. For all we know, they’re convicted felons or escapees from a mental institution.”I wasn’t going to speak to her flight of fancy. If the notion gave her comfort, let her hang on to it. “It’s always possible,” I said, “but I’m assuming none of them have access to the house at night. I thought you had an alarm system.”“Well, we do. The police were interested in the system as well, but that’s the problem,” she said. “With all the high winds we’ve had here the past couple of days, windows were blowing open and the alarm kept going off. It happened twice Monday night after we’d all gone to bed. Scared the shit out of me. We finally turned it off so it wouldn’t happen again. Last night, the system wasn’t on at all.”“When do they think Guy was killed?” I asked.“Around ten, I gather. Between ten and eleven. The detective didn’t actually say that, but I noticed that was the period that seemed to interest him. Bennet and Jack were both out until late.”A woman in a housekeeper’s uniform, with an apron tied over it, peered in at the door. She was short and round, and looked like someone whose eating habits had long ago outstripped any fat-burning activities. She was probably in her mid-forties, with dark hair pulled back neatly under a red-and-white bandanna she’d wrapped around her head. I wasn’t sure if the purpose was ornamental or meant to keep falling hair from seasoning the food. “Excuse me. I’m sorry to interrupt, but I’m wondering what time you want dinner served.”Christie made a face. “My fault, Enid. I should have talked to you. Donovan’s not back yet and I’m not really sure about Jack and Bennet. What are we having? Will it hold?”“Baked chicken breasts. I stopped off at the market on my way in to work. I went ahead and changed the menu, so there’s plenty if you’re having extra people. I did up some oven-roasted potatoes and a casserole of sweet-and-sour cabbage. I can wait and serve if you like.” Somehow she managed to indicate without a word that waiting around to serve dinner was the last choice on her list.“No, no, no. I don’t want you to do that. Just leave things in the oven and we can help ourselves. As soon as you’re ready, go ahead and take off. I know you were in early.”“Yes, ma’am. Myrna called me. I came as soon as I heard.”“Have the police talked to you? I’m assuming they have. They talked to everyone else.”Enid picked at her apron uncomfortably. “I talked to Lieutenant Bower shortly before you did, I believe. Do you want me tomorrow at the usual time?”“I don’t know yet. Call me in the morning and we’ll see what’s going on. I may want you here early if that’s all right with you.”“Of course.”As soon as she withdrew, Christie said, “Sorry for the interruption. That’s Enid Pressman. She’s the cook. I guess I could have introduced you. I didn’t mean to be rude. Tasha’s met her before.”“That’s perfectly all right,” I said. I made a quick mental note to have a chat with Enid at some point. She’d neatly avoided relating much in the way of information.Tasha said, “Maybe I will have that drink. Here, let me get it. You look exhausted. We need to sit.”Christie had put the wine bottle in a cooler and now grabbed two more glasses. Tasha moved over to the bar and took the cooler from her, setting it down on a table between two chairs. Christie quizzed me with a gesture, asking if I was ready to have wine.“I’m fine for now, but go ahead,” I said.Christie curled up in one of the leather chairs. She tucked her legs under her and crossed her arms.I took the chair closest to the fireplace while Tasha perched on the arm of the chair next to Christie’s. Tasha said, “What about Bennet? Where was he last night?”“I’m not really sure. You’d have to ask him about that.”“And Jack?”“Over at the country club with a hundred other fellows. There’s a pro-am tournament coming up this weekend. Practice rounds start on Thursday. He went to the pairings’ party with a friend of his.”“That should be easy enough to verify,” Tasha said.“Would you quit talking like that? He didn’t kill Guy and neither did I”“Christie, I’m not accusing you. I’m trying to analyze your position here. Given the situation, suspicion’s bound to fall on one of you. I don’t mean you specifically, so don’t take offense. Other people may have access to the property, but who’d have a better motive than the family? There’s a lot of money at stake.”“But Tasha, that’s ridiculous. If one of us were going to kill him, why do it here? Why not somewhere else? Make it look like an accident or random violence.”I raised my hand like a student. “Think of the convenience. If you kill a man in his sleep, you don’t have to worry about him putting up a fight.”Jonah Robb appeared in the doorway, his gaze fixed on Christie. “We’ll be taking off shortly. The bedroom’s still sealed pending the coroner’s report. It’s strictly off limits until you hear from us. We’ll be here early tomorrow morning to finish things up.”“Of course. Will there be anything else?”“I understand your brother-in-law received some mail...”“We gave that to the other detective, Lieutenant Bower.”Jonah nodded. “Fine. I’ll check with her.”“Do you have any idea what time we can expect my husband? When I left the station, he was still being interviewed.”“I’ll have him call if he’s there when I get back to the station. With luck, he’ll be done and on his way home.”“Thanks.”Jonah’s gaze came to rest on mine and he tilted his head. “Can I see you out here?”I got up and crossed the room. He held the door open and we went into the hall.He said, “Donovan tells us you were the one who located Guy on behalf of the estate.”“That’s right.”“We’re going to want to talk to you in the morning, picking up background information.”“Of course. Glad to help. I can stop by at nine on my way into work,” I said. “What’s this business about the mail?”“I haven’t seen it yet,” he said obliquely, meaning none-of-your-beeswax. We looked at each other for perhaps half a moment longer than was absolutely essential. I’d always thought Jonah was good-looking. Black Irish, I think they call them. Blue eyes, coal-black hair. He looked worn-out and tense, his eyes surrounded by a lacework of fine lines, his skin looking coarser than I remembered. Perhaps as a side effect of my renewed sexuality, I found myself sizing up the men in my life.. With Jonah, there was a dark radiance in the air. I felt like a fruit fly, wondering if the pheromones were mine or his.“How’s Camilla?”“She’s pregnant.”“Congratulations.”“It’s not mine.”“Ah.”“What about. you? You involved with anyone these days?”“Could be. It’s hard to know.”His smile was brief. “See you in the morning.”That you will, I thought.
