---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_023.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["brant", "could", "like", "said", "gun", "rafer", "would", "hand", "one", "right", "see", "back", "tom", "think", "barrett", "thought", "heard", "knew", "went", "turned", "way", "kitchen", "house", "felt", "someone"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit023html

---


Unknown
TWENTY-TWOI glanced at my watch. 5:36. 1 walked back to the kitchen prepared to dial 9-1-1. I hesitated, my hand on the receiver. Who was I going to call? Rafer? Brant? Tom’s brother, Macon? I wasn’t sure I trusted any one of them. I stood there, trying to determine whom I could confide in at this point. A chill went through me. Surely, there wasn’t anybody in the house with me. I hadn’t gone to the guest room since I’d returned to the house early in the afternoon so the intruder had probably been here and departed long before I showed up. Ordinarily, I’d have gone to my room to drop my jacket. After the day I’d had, I might have showered or napped-anything to perk myself up and restore my confidence-but I’d been intent on Tom’s notes and I’d gone directly to his den. I felt disembodied, my mind having been separated from my flesh by the harrowing sensation of fear.The phone shrilled with extraordinary loudness, setting off a surge of nausea. I jumped, nerves raw, my reflexes responding sharply, almost to the point of pain. I snatched up the receiver before it had ceased to ring. “Hello?”“Hey, Kinsey. Brant here. Is my mom home yet?” He sounded young and carefree, relaxed, unconcerned.My stomach churned in response. “You need to come home,” I said. My voice seemed to be coming from a curious distance.He must have been alerted by my tone because his shifted. “Why? What’s going on?”“Someone’s broken in. There’s glass on the bedroom floor and my gun is gone.”“Where’s Mom?”“I don’t know. Yes. Wait. At your cousin’s in Big Pine. I’m here alone,” I said.“Stay where you are. I’ll be right there.”He hung up.I replaced the receiver. I turned and leaned my back up against the wall, making little mewling sounds. A town full of cowboys and someone was coming after me. I held my hands out in front of me. I could see my fingers tremble, the recently dislocated digits looking all puffy and useless. My gun had been stolen. I had to have a weapon, some way to defend myself against the coming onslaught. I started opening the kitchen drawers, one after the other, in search of a knife. One drawer flew off its rails and banged against my thigh, spilling out its contents. Utensils jangled together, tumbling to the floor at my feet. I could feel the tears stinging my lids. I gathered a fistful of items and tossed them back in the drawer, but I couldn’t seem to get it mounted on its track again. I banged it on the counter top so hard a metal spatula bounced and flew out. I left the drawer where it was. I found a steak knife, some generic brand that looked like a giveaway in a box of detergent. The overhead light glinted off its surface. I could see the bevel on the blade. What good would a serrated steak knife do against a speeding bullet?Hours seemed to go by.I could hear the second hand on the kitchen clock tick each passing second in turn.Outside, I heard the squeal of brakes, and then a car door slammed shut. I turned and stared at the front door. What if it was someone else? What if it was them? The door flew open and I could see Brant in his civilian clothes. He moved toward me with all the comforting bulk of a battleship. I put a hand out and he took it.“Jesus, you look awful. How’d the guy get in?”I pointed to my room and then found myself following as he moved purposefully down the hall in that direction. His assessment was brief, the most cursory of glances. He turned away from the guest room and toured the rest of the house methodically, looking in every closet, every nook and cranny. He went down to the basement. I waited at the top of the stairs, one hand plucking at the other. My injured fingers held a particular fascination for me-clumsy and swollen. Where was my gun? How could I defend myself when I’d left the knife on the counter?Brant returned to the kitchen. I followed him like a duckling. I could tell by his tone he was trying to control himself. Something in his manner conveyed the seriousness of the situation. “Did he get the notebook?”I found myself grinding my teeth. “Who?”“The guy who broke in,” he said sharply.“It was in my bag,” I said. “Is that what he was after?”“Of course,” Brant said. “I can’t think why else he’d risk it. Tell me exactly what you did today. What time did you leave and how long were you gone?”I felt burbling and incoherent, spilling out the story of my rebuff, the refusal of the gas station attendants to do business with me, my subsequent stop at the Rainbow to talk to Nancy. I told him I’d run into Rafer and Vick, that I’d talked to Cecilia and Barrett. My brain was moving at twice the speed of my lips, making me feel sluggish and stupid. Brant, god bless him, seemed to follow the staccato pace of the narrative, filling in the blanks when an occasional word came up missing. What was wrong with me? I knew I’d felt like this before-this scared-this powerless-this out of it...Brant was staring at me. “You actually talked to him?”What was he talking about? “Who?” I sounded like an owl.“Rafer.”What had I asked? What had he said before this? What did Rafer have to do with anything? “What?”“Rafer. At the Rainbow.”“Yes. I ran into him at the Rainbow.”“I know that. You told me. I’m asking you if you talked to him,” he said, with exaggerated patience.“Sure.”“You talked to him?!” His voice had risen with alarm. I could see the question mark and the exclamation point hurtling through the air at me. “I brought him up to date,” I said. My voice was delayed, like something in an echo chamber. Words in balloons bumped together above my head, images like projectiles flying off in all directions.“I told you to wait ‘til I could check it out. Who do you think started all the rumors?”“Who?”Brant took me by the shoulders and gave me a little shake. He seemed angry, his fingers biting into my shoulders. “Kinsey, wake up and pay attention. This is serious,” he said.“You’re not saying it was him?”“Of course, it was him. Who else could it be? Think about it, dummy.”“Think about what?” I asked, confused. The immediacy of his discomposure was contagious. I was relying on him for help, but his anxiety was pushing mine into the danger zone.His voice pounded on, pleading and cajoling, wheedling. “You told Mom it was someone in law enforcement. Do you honestly think my father would have lost even one night’s sleep if it was anyone but Rafer? Rafer was his best friend. The two of them had worked together for years and years. Dad thought Rafer was one of the finest cops who ever lived. Now he finds out he killed two guys? Jeez. He must have shit himself when he understood what was going on. Didn’t he write this down? Isn’t this in his notes?”His words were like streamers, blowing above his head.I heard snapping, like flags. “The notes are in code. I can’t read them.”“Where? Can you show me? Maybe I can crack it.”“In there. You think he was on the verge of talking to Internal Affairs?”“Of course! The decision couldn’t have been easy, but even as loyal as he was to Rafer, the department came first. He must have been praying for a way out, hoping he was wrong.”My brain worked lickety-cut. It was my mouth that fumbled, thoughts crashing against my teeth like rocks. I had to clamp my jaw shut, barely moving my lips. “I talked to Barrett. She was with Tom in the truck just before he died,” I said.“What did they talk about? Why did he do that?”“Something. I can’t remember.”“Didn’t you press her for answers? You had the girl right there in the palm of your hand,” he said. His words appeared in the air, written in big capital letters.“Quit yelling.”“I’m not yelling. What’s the matter with you?”“Barrett never said a word about Rafer.” I remembered then. She did say Tom had asked about her father.“Why would she? She doesn’t know you from Adam. She’s not going to confide. She wouldn’t tell you something like that. Her own father? For god’s sake, she’d have to be nuts,” he shrilled.“But why give me the notes? Wouldn’t she assume they’d be incriminating?”“Barrett doesn’t have a clue. She has no idea.”“How do you know what he did?”“Because I can add,” he said, exasperated. “I put two and two together. Listen, Tom met with Barrett. He was probably trying to find out about Rafer’s whereabouts when Pinkie was murdered. Same with Alfie Toth. He saw the connection. He was worried someone in the department would get wind of his suspicions, didn’t you say that? Someone had already ripped him off for the information about Toth. Who do you think it was? Rafer.”“Rafer,” I said. I was nodding. I could see what he was saying. I’d been thinking the same thing. Tom’s friendship with Rafer was such that he’d think long and hard before he turned him in to the authorities, betraying their friendship. A conflict of that magnitude would have caused him extreme distress. My brain was clicking and buzzing. Click, click, click. Rafer. It was like a pinball game. Thoughts ricocheted around, setting off bells, bouncing against the rails. I thought about the clerk at the Gramercy. Why didn’t he tell me the phony plainclothes detective was black? You’d think he’d remember something so obvious. My mind kept veering. I couldn’t hold a thought in one place and follow it to its conclusion. Click, click. Like pool balls. The cue ball would break and all the other balls on the table would fly off in separate directions. I wished I’d talked to Leland Peck before I left Santa Teresa. I was feeling very weird. So anxious. Sound fading in and out. I could see it undulate through space, sentences like surfers cresting on the waves of air.Brant was still talking. He seemed to be speaking gibberish, but it all made a peculiar sense. “Pinkie went after Barrett. She was hiking in the mountains and stumbled across their fishing camp.”On and on he went, creating word pictures so vivid I thought it was happening to me.“Barrett was assaulted. He put a gun to her head.She was raped. She was attacked and sexually abused. Pinkie sodomized and hurt her. He forced her to perform unspeakable acts. Alfie did nothing-offered her no assistance-ran off, leaving her to Pinkie’s mercy. Barrett came back hysterical, in a state of shock. Rafer went after Pinkie and took him down. He strung him up, hung him from the limb of a tree and let him die slowly for what he had done to her. He would have killed Alfie, too, but Alfie escaped and blew town. Rafer thought he was safe all these years and then Pinkie’s body turned up and Dad found the link between the two men. He drove all the way to Santa Teresa to talk to him, but Rafer got there first. He hung Toth the same way he hung Pinkie.” Brant was looking at me earnestly. “What’s wrong with your eyes?”“My eyes?” Once he mentioned it, I realized my field of vision had begun to oscillate, images sliding side to side, like bad camera work. I felt giddy, as if I was on the verge of fainting. I sat down. I put my head between my knees, a roaring in my ears.“Are you okay?”“Fine.” Lights seemed to pulsate and sounds came and went. I couldn’t keep it straight. I knew what he was saying, but I couldn’t make the words stand still. I saw Rafer with the noose. I saw him tighten it on Pinkie’s neck. I saw him hang Alfie in the wilderness. I felt his rage and his pain for what they’d done to his only daughter. I said, “How do you know all this?”“Because Barrett told me when it happened. Jesus, Kinsey. That’s why I broke up with her. I was twenty years old. I couldn’t handle it,” he said, anguished.“I’m sorry. I’m sorry,” I said, but immediately forgot who was more deserving of my pity-Barrett for being raped, Brant for not having the maturity to deal with it.Brant’s tone became accusatory. “You’re loaded. I don’t believe it. What the hell are you high on?”“I’m high?” Of course. Daniel playing the piano. My ex-husband. So beautiful. Eyes like an angel, a halo of golden curls and how I’d loved him. He’d given me acid once without telling me and I watched the floor recede into the mouth of hell.Brant’s head came up. “What’s that?” he hissed.“What?”“I heard something.” His agitation washed over me. His fear was infectious, as swift as an airborne virus. I could smell corruption and death. I’d been in situations like this before.“Hang on.” Brant strode down the hall. I saw him look out of the small ornamental window in the front door. He pulled back abruptly and then gestured urgently in my direction. “A car cruised by with its lights doused. He’s parked across the street about six doors down. You have a gun?”“I told you someone stole it. Whoever broke in. I don’t have a gun. What’s happening?”“Rafer,” he said, grimly. He crossed to the drawer in his mother’s kitchen desk where she did her menu planning. He pulled out a gun and thrust it in my hand. “Here. Take this.”I stood and stared at it with bewilderment. “Thanks,” I whispered. The gun was a basic police revolver, Smith Wesson. I’d nearly bought one like it once,. 357 Magnum, four-inch barrel, checkered walnut stocks. I studied the grooves in the stock. Some of them were so deep, I couldn’t see to the bottom.“Rafer will come in with guns blazing,” Brant was saying. “No deals. He’s told everyone that you’re a killer, that you do drugs, and here you are stoned on something.”“I didn’t do anything,” I said, mouth dry. The brownies. I was higher than he knew. I racked back through my memory, classes at the police academy, my years in uniform on the street, trying to remember symptoms; phencyclidines, stimulants, hallucinogens, sedative-hypnotics, narcotics. What had I ingested? Confusion, paranoia, slurred speech, nystagmus. I could see the columns marching across the pages of the text. PCP vocabulary. Rocket Fuel, DOA, KJ, Super Joint, Mint Weed, Gorilla Biscuits. I was out of my brain on speed.“You found him out. He’ll have to kill you. We’ll have to shoot it out,” Brant said.“Don’t leave me. You talk to him. I can get away,” I burbled.“He’s thought of that. He’ll have help. Probably Macon and Hatch. They both hate you. We better get down to business.”When Brant peeled off his outer jacket, I smelled stress sweat, the scent as acrid and piercing as ammonia. I glanced at his hands. Given any visual field, the eye tends to stray to the one different item in a ground of like items. Even bombed, I caught sight of a blemish on his right wrist, a dark patch... a tattoo or a birthmark... shaped like the prow of a ship. The blot stood out like a brand on the clean white surface of his skin. Sizzling, my brain zapped through the possibilities: scar, hickey, smudge, scab. I was slow on the uptake. I looked back and then I saw it for what it was. The mark was a burn. The healing discoloration was a match for the tip of the ticking hot iron I’d pressed on him. Adrenaline rushed through me. Something close to euphoria filled my flesh and bones. My mind made an odd leap to something else altogether. I’d been struggling to break the code with logic and analysis when the answer was really one of spatial relationships. Vertical, not horizontal. That’s how the numbers worked. Up and down instead of back and forth across the lines.I put the gun on the kitchen table. “I’ll be right back,” I said. With extraordinary effort, I propelled myself into Tom’s den, hand to the wall to steady my yawning gait. 8, 12, 1, 11, and 26. I sat down at his desk and looked at the calendar Tom had drawn. I could see the month of February, twenty-eight days penned in with the First falling on a Sunday and the last two Saturdays, the Twenty-first and the Twenty-eighth, crossed out, leaving twenty-six numbers. I’d suspected the code was simple. If Tom encrypted his notes, he had to have an uncomplicated means by which to convert letters to numbers.I found a pencil. I turned to the calendar grid that he’d drawn on the corner of his blotter. I wrote the letters of the alphabet, inserting one letter per day, using vertical rows this time. If my theory was correct, then the code would confirm what I already knew: 8 would represent the letter B. The number 12 would stand in for the letter R. The number 1 would be A, and 11 would represent an N, and the 26 would be T.B-R-A-N-T.Brant.I could feel a laugh billow up. I was stuck in the house with him. He would have had easy access to his father’s notes. The search of the den-the broken window-both had been a cover, suggesting to the rest of us that someone from the outside had entered the house in hopes of finding the notes. It wasn’t Barrett at all. Pinkie hadn’t raped and sodomized Barrett. It was Brant he’d humiliated and degraded.“What are you doing?”I jumped. Brant was standing in the doorway. I was standing in horseshit up to my underpants. The sight of him wavered, shimmering, image moving side to side. I couldn’t think of a way to answer. Nystagmus. Something in brownies, possibly PCP. Aggression, paranoia. I was smarter than him. Oh, much smarter. I was smarter than anyone that day.“What are you looking at?”“Tom’s notes.”“Why?”“I can’t make heads or tails of them. The code.”He stared at me. I could tell he was trying to determine if what I’d said was true. I kept my mind empty. I don’t think I’d ever seen him looking so lean and young and handsome. Death is like that, a lover whose embrace you sink into without warning. Instead of flight or resistance, voluptuous surrender. He held out his hand. “I’ll take the notes.”I passed the notebook across to him, picturing the Smith Wesson. Where had I heard about a gun like that before? I could feel my brain crackling, thoughts popping like kernels banging against the lid of a popcorn pan. There was no way in the world he would give me a gun unless he intended to see that I was killed with it. Rafer LaMott wasn’t outside and neither was anybody else. This was a charade, setting me up in some way. I envisioned the scene-the two of us skulking through the house, ostensibly waiting for an attack that would never come. Brant could shoot me anytime he chose, claiming later he’d mistaken me for an intruder, claiming self-defense, claiming I was stoned out of my gourd, which I was. Even as the thought formed, I felt the drugs kick up a notch. I could feel myself expanding. I could outsmart him. He was strong, but I had more experience than he did. I knew more about him than he knew about me. I’d been a cop once. I knew everything he knew, plus some.“Is the car still out there?” I asked.Brant dropped back into his fantasy. He moved to the window and put his face close to the glass, peering off to the right. “Down half a block. You can barely see it from here.”“I think we should turn the lights out. I don’t like standing here in plain view.”He studied me for a second, picturing the house black as pitch. “You’re right. Hit the switch. I’ll take care of all the other lights in the house.”“Good.” I turned the den light out. I waited until I heard him moving down the hall toward the front. Then I eased to the window, flipped the lock, and pushed the sash up about six inches. I dropped down to the floor, felt my way across the room to the cabinet, and slid myself feet-first into the space beneath the bookshelves.Birth in reverse. I was hidden from view. Moments went by, the house becoming darker by the minute as lamps were being switched off in every room Brant entered.“Kinsey?” Brant was back.Silence.I heard him come to the den. He must have stood in the doorway, allowing his eyes to adjust to the black. He crossed to the window, bumping into cardboard boxes. I heard him force the window open and look out. I was gone. There was no sign of me running across the grass. “Shit!” He slammed the window shut and said, “Shit, shit, shit!” He must have had a gun because I heard him rack one into the chamber.He left the den, hollering my name as he went. Now he was mad. Now he didn’t care if I knew he was coming. I pulled myself out of the cabinet, hanging on to the shelf as I staggered to my feet. I crossed to the desk and opened the bottom drawer as quietly as possible. I took out Tom’s handcuffs and tucked them in my back pocket. I could feel myself swell with power. I was suddenly larger than life, far beyond fear, luminous with fury. As I turned right out of the den into the darkness of the hallway, I could see him moving ahead of me, his body mass blacker than the charcoal light surrounding him. I began to run, picking up speed, my Reeboks making no sound on the carpet. Brant sensed my presence, turning as I lifted myself into the air. I snapped a hard front kick to his solar plexus, taking him down with one pop. I heard his gun thump dully against the wall, banging against wood as it flew out of his hand. I kicked him again, catching him squarely on the side of the head. I scrambled to my feet and stood over him. I could have crushed his skull, but as a courtesy, I refrained from doing so. I pulled the handcuffs from my pocket. I grabbed the fingers of his right hand and bent them backward, encouraging compliance. I lay the cuff on his right wrist and snapped downward, smiling grimly to myself as the swinging arm of the cuff locked in place. I put my left foot on the back of his neck while I yanked his right arm behind him and I grabbed for his left. I would have stomped down on his face, pulverizing his nose if he’d so much as whimpered. He was out cold. I double-locked both handcuffs in place. All of this without hesitation. All of this in the dark.The light in the kitchen was snapped on. Selma appeared in the doorway, still wearing her fur coat. She stood as still as a soldier and took in the sight before her. Brant was now moaning. Blood was pouring from his nose and he was struggling for breath. “Mom, watch out. She’s stoned,” he croaked.Selma backed into the kitchen. I was moving away from her down the corridor, looking for Brant’s gun when she showed up again, this time with the Smith Wesson in her right hand. I had no idea where Brant’s gun had gone. I remembered the telltale thump at the end of its airborne journey.“Stop right there,” she said. She was now holding the gun with two hands, arms extended stiffly at shoulder height. I went about my business, ignoring her little drama. She had no way of knowing I’d been sanctified by Angel Dust. I was higher than a kite on PCP, methamphetamines, whatever it was-some amazing mix of excitation and immortality. The unpleasant side effects were now gone and I was detached from all feeling, secure in the sense that I would prevail over this bitch and anyone else who came after me.“You’re not going to take my son away from me.”As much as anything, I was annoyed with her. “I told you to forget it. You should have left well enough alone. Now you’ve not only lost Tom, you’ve lost Brant as well,” I said, conversationally. I got down on my hands and knees and felt under the chair. Where the hell was Brant’s gun?“You are completely mistaken. I haven’t lost Brant at all,” she said. “Now get up right this minute! Do as I say!”“Blow it out your ass, Selma. Do you see Brant’s gun? I heard it bang against the wall. It’s gotta be here somewhere.”“I’m warning you. I’ll count to three and then I’m going to shoot you.”“You do that,” I said. I moved into the dining room, convinced the gun had somehow become wedged under the hutch, the centerpiece in Selma’s entire set of handsome, formal, glossy dark wood furniture. I placed my shoulder against the floor, reaching under the hutch as far as the length of my arm. It was in this awkward position-me spread-eagled on my stomach, Brant handcuffed and moaning in the hall, Selma angling herself into position to blow my head off if she could manage it-that I chanced to look up at her, watching in slow-motion amazement as she screwed up her face, closed her eyes, turned her head, and squeezed the trigger. There was a bright flash and a loud bang. The bullet exited the barrel at a lethal velocity. The normal football-shaped muzzle flash out the front of the gun and the vertical fan-shaped flashes at the cylinder gap seemed to be enhanced, a dazzling yellow. Brant had apparently packed the first cartridge with an overload of fast powder. I thought I knew now who Judy Gelson’s lover was the night she blew a hole in her husband’s chest. The chamber and the top strap ruptured. The blast unlatched the cylinder and drove it out to the left side of the gun. The brass cartridge case shredded and tiny bits of brass peppered Selma’s hands, flakes of unburned powder peppering her face as well. Simultaneously, as though by magic, all the glass in the cabinet doors, including the crystal goblets and the bone china plates, exploded like fireworks and formed a glittering starburst of falling glass and debris.“Fuck. That was great. You should try that again,” I said.Selma was weeping as I walked to the phone and dialed 9-1-1.
