---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_017.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["pinkie", "dolores", "said", "like", "little", "homer", "think", "could", "still", "one", "room", "kid", "see", "thought", "em", "know", "say", "want", "time", "alfie", "barbie", "doll", "two", "man", "head"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit017html

---


Unknown
SIXTEENWhen I returned from my run the next morning, there was a message from Colleen Sellers on my answering machine, giving me the name and Perdido address of a woman named Dolores Ruggles, one of Pinkie Ritter’s daughters. As this represented the only lead I had, I gassed up the VW and headed south on 101 as soon as I was showered and dressed.On my left, I could see fields under cultivation, the newly planted rows secured by layers of plastic sheeting as slick and gray as ice. Steep hills, rough with low growing vegetation, began to crowd up against the highway. On my right, the bleak Pacific Ocean thundered against the shore. Surfers in black wetsuits waited on rocking boards like a scattered flock of sea birds. The rains had moved on, but the sky was still white with a ceiling of sluggish clouds and the air was thick with the mingled scents of brine and recent precipitation. Snow would be falling in the high Sierras near Nota Lake.I took the Leeward off-ramp and made two left turns, crossing over the freeway again in search of the street where Dolores Ruggles lived. The neighborhood was a warren of low stucco structures, narrow streets intersecting one another repeatedly. The house was a plain box, sitting in a plain treeless yard with scarcely a bush or a tuft of grass to break up the monotonous flat look of the place. The porch consisted of a slab of concrete with one step leading up to the front door and a small cap of roofing to protect you as you rang the bell, which I did. The door was veneer with long sharp splinters of wood missing from the bottom edge. It looked like a dog had been chewing on the threshold.The man who opened the door was drying his hands on a towel tucked into the waist of his trousers. He was easily in his sixties, maybe five-foot-eight, with a coarsely lined face and a thinning head of gray-white hair the color of wood ash. His eyes were hazel, his brows a tangle of wiry black and gray. “Keep your shirt on,” he said, irritably.“Sorry. I thought the bell was broken. I wasn’t even sure anyone was home. I’m looking for Dolores Ruggles.”“Who the hell are you?”I handed him my card, watching his lips move while he read my name. “I’m a private investigator,” I said.“I can see that. It says right here. Now we got that established, what do you want with Dolores? She’s busy at the moment and doesn’t want to be disturbed.”“I need some information. Maybe you can help me and we can spare her the imposition. I’m here about her father.”“The little shithead was murdered.”“I’m aware of that.”“Then what’s it to you?”“I’m trying to find out what happened.”“What difference does it make? The man is D-E-A-D dead and not soon enough to suit my taste. I’ve spent years coping with all the damage he did.”“Could I come in?”He stared at me. “Help yourself,” he said abruptly and turned on his heel, leaving me to follow. I scurried after him, taking a quick mental photograph as we passed through the living room. Not to sound sexist, but the room looked as if it had been designed by a man. The floors were bare hardwood, stained dark. I noted a tired couch and a sagging upholstered chair, both shrouded by heavy woven Indian-print rugs. I thought the coffee table was antiqued, but I could see as I passed the only patina was dust. The walls were lined with books: upright, sideways, slanting, stacked, packed two deep on some shelves, three deep on others. The accumulation of magazines, newspapers, junk mail, and catalogs suggested a suffocating indifference to tidiness.“I’m doing dishes out here,” he said, as he moved into the kitchen. “Grab a towel and you can pitch in. You might as well be useful as long as you’re picking my brain. By the way, I’m Homer, Dolores’s husband. Mr. Ruggles to you.”His tone had shifted from outright rudeness to something gruff, but not unpleasant. I could see he’d been rather good-looking in his day; not wildly handsome, but something better-a man with a certain amount of character and an appealing air. His skin was darkly tanned and heavily speckled with sun damage, as if he’d spent all his life toiling in the fields. His shirt was an earth brown with an elaborately embroidered yoke done in threads of gold and black. He wore cowboy boots that I suspected were intended to add a couple of inches to his height.By the time I reached the kitchen, he’d turned on the water again and he was already back at work, washing plates and glassware. “Towel’s in there,” he said, nodding at the drawer to his immediate left. I took out a clean dish towel and reached for a plate still hot from the rinse water. “You can stack those on the kitchen table. I’ll put ’em up when we’re done.”I glanced at the table. “Uhm, Mr. Ruggles, the table needs to be wiped. Do you have a sponge?”Homer turned and gave me a look. “This is a telling trait of yours, isn’t it?”“Oh, sure,” I said.“Skip the Mr. Ruggles bit. It sounds absurd.”“Yes, Sir.”That netted me half a smile. He wrung out the cloth and tossed it in my direction with a shake of his head. I wiped off the table top, setting several items aside: newspaper; salt-and-pepper shakers shaped like the Wolf and Little Red Riding Hood; a clutch of pill bottles with Dolores’s name plastered on them, along with various warning labels. Whatever she was taking, she was supposed to avoid alcohol, excessive exposure to sunlight, and the operation of heavy machinery. I wondered if this referred to cars, tractors, or Amtrak locomotives. When I’d finished, I handed him the rag and then picked up the dish towel and resumed wiping the plate.“So what’s the deal?” he said belatedly. “What’s your interest in Pinkie Ritter? Nice girl like you should be ashamed.”“I didn’t know anything about him until yesterday. I’ve been tracking down a friend of his, who may have been... Could we just skip this part? It’s almost too tricky to explain.”“You’re talking Alfie Toth.”“Thank you. That’s right. Everybody seems to know about him.”“Yeah, well, Alfie was a birdbrain. Women thought he was attractive, but I couldn’t see it myself. How can you think some guy’s handsome when you know he’s dim? To my way of thinking, it spoils the whole effect. I think he hung out with my father-in-law for protection, which just goes to show you how dumb he was.”“You knew Alfie was dead?”“You bet. The police told us about it when his body turned up. They came around asking the same question you probably want answered, which is what’s the connection and who did what to whom? I’ll give you the same answer I gave them. I don’t know.”“What’s the story on Pinkie? I take it you didn’t think much of him.”“That’s a gross understatement. I really hated his guts. Whoever killed Pinkie saved me life in prison. Pinkie had six kids-three sons and three daughters and mistreated every one of them from the day they were born ‘til they got big enough to fight back. Nowadays there’s all this talk of abuse, but Pinkie did the real thing. He punched them, burned them, made ’em drink vinegar and hot sauce for talking back to him. He locked them in closets, set them out in the cold. He screwed ’em, starved ’em, threatened them. He hit ’em with belts, boards, metal pipes, sticks, hairbrushes, fists. Pinkie was the meanest son of a bitch I ever met and that’s goin’ some.”“Didn’t anybody intervene?”“People tried. Lot of people blew the whistle on him. Trick was trying to prove it. Teachers, guidance counselors, next-door neighbors. Sometimes Children’s Services managed to take the kids away from him and foster them out. Judge always gave ’em back.” He shook his head. “Pinkie knew how the game was played. He kept a clean house-the kids saw to that-and he did like to cook-that was his specialty. It’s what he did for a living when he wasn’t breaking their heads or breaking the law. Social workers came around and everything looked fine. Kids knew better than to open their mouths. Dolores says she can remember the six of them lined up in the living room, answering questions just as nice as you please. Pinkie wouldn’t be in the room, but he was always somewhere close. Kids knew better than to rat on him or they’d be dead by dark. They’d stand there and lie. Said social workers knew, but couldn’t get anything on him without their assistance. Only thing saved ’em was his getting thrown in jail.”“What about his wife? Where was she all this time?”“Dolores thinks he killed her though it couldn’t be proved. He claims she ran off with some barfly and was never heard from again. Dolores says she remembers as a kid waking up in the dead of night. Pinkie was out in the woods behind the house with a power saw. Lantern on the ground throwing these big shadows up against the trees. Moths fluttering around the light. She still has nightmares about that. She was the baby in the family, six years old at the time. I think the oldest was fifteen. She went out there next day. The ground was all turned, probably to hide the blood. She still remembers the smell-like a package of chicken when it’s gone funny and has to be thrown out. Mom was never seen nor heard from again.”“Pinkie sounds like a very nasty piece of work.”“The worst.”“So anybody could have killed him, including one of his kids. Is that what you’re saying?”“That would cover it,” he said. “Of course, by the time he died, they were out from under his control. The rest of the kids had scattered to hell and gone. Couple of ’em still in California, though we don’t see ’em all that much.” Homer finished the last dish and turned the water off. I continued drying silverware while he put away the clean plates.“When did you see him last?”“Five years ago in March. The minute he got out of Chino, he headed straight up here, arrived on the Twenty-fifth and stayed a week.”“Good memory,” I remarked.“The cops asked me about that so I looked it up. How I pinpointed the date is I withdrew five hundred bucks from a bank account the day Pinkie left. I counted backward from that and the date stuck in my mind. Anything else you want to quiz me about?”“I didn’t mean to interrupt. Go on.”“Dolores was the only kid of his still living in the area so naturally, he felt she owed him room and board for as long as he liked.”“She agreed to that?”“Of course.”“Didn’t you object?”“I did, but that was an argument I couldn’t win. She felt guilty. She’s a hell of a gal and what she’s endured, believe me, you don’t want to know-but the upshot is, she’s anxious to please, easily manipulated especially when it came to him. She wanted that man’s love. Don’t ask me to explain, given what she suffered. He was still Daddy to her and she couldn’t turn him away. He was just like he always was: demanding, critical. He refused to lift a finger, expecting her to wait on him hand and foot. I finally got fed up and told him to clear out. Pinkie says, ‘Fine, no problem. I won’t stay where I’m not wanted. To hell with you,’ he says. He was sore as a boil and feeling much put upon, but I was damned if I’d back down.”“Toth was with him at the time?”“Off and on. I think Alfie’s ex-wife lived in town somewhere. He mooched off her when he wasn’t here mooching off us.”“And the two left together?”“As far as I know. At least, that was the plan.”“And where were they headed?”“Los Angeles. You piece it together later and it turns out they stole a car in Los Angeles and drove up to Lake Tahoe.”“What about Pinkie’s parole officer? Wasn’t he supposed to report in?”“Hey, you’re talking a career criminal. Following the rules wasn’t exactly his strong suit. Who the hell knows how he got away with it? Same with Toth.”“You think someone could have been after them?”“I wouldn’t know,” he said. “Pinkie didn’t act like he was worried. Why? You think someone might have been trailing them?”“It’s possible,” I said.“Yeah, well it’s also possible Pinkie overstepped his bounds for once. He was one of those little guys, chip on his shoulder and feisty as all get out. I can’t say that about Alfie. He seemed harmless. Pinkie’s another matter. Whoever killed Pinkie should get a medal, in my opinion. And don’t quote me. Dolores gets upset if she hears me talkin’ like that. I notice I’m doing all the talking.”“I appreciate that.”“This is good. I appreciate your appreciation. Now it’s your turn. What’s a private investigator doing in the middle of a homicide investigation? Last I heard they didn’t have a suspect so you can’t be working for the public defender’s office.”Given his cooperation, I thought he was entitled to an explanation. I filled him in on the situation, beginning with Selma Newquist and ending with Colleen Sellers. The only thing I omitted were details of the two killings. He didn’t seem curious about specifics and I wouldn’t have revealed the information for all the money in the world. In the meantime, on an almost subliminal level, I could hear an odd series of voices from another room. At first, I thought the sound was coming from a radio, or television set, but the phrases were repeated, the tone lifeless and mechanical. Homer heard it, too, and his gaze caught mine. He tilted his head in the direction of the short hallway that seemed to lead into a back bedroom. “Dolores’s back there. You want to talk to her?”“If you think it’s okay.”“She can handle it,” he said. “Give me a second and I’ll tell her what’s going on. She might have something to add.”He moved down the hall to the door, tapping once before he entered. As he eased through the opening, I felt a moment’s unease. Here I was in a strange house in the company of a man I’d never laid eyes on before. I had taken him at face value, trusting him on instinct though I wasn’t sure why. Really, I only had his word for it that Dolores was in the other room. I had one of those flash fantasies of him emerging from the bedroom with a butcher knife in hand. Fortunately, life, even for a private eye, is seldom this interesting. The door opened again and Homer motioned me in.At first sight, I thought Dolores Ruggles couldn’t have been a day over twenty-five. Later, I found out that she was twenty-eight, which still seemed too young to be married to a man Homer’s age. Slim, petite, she sat at a workbench in a room filled with Barbie dolls. Floor to ceiling, wall to wall, dressed in an astonishing array of styles, these bland plastic women were decked out in miniature sun dresses, evening clothes, suits, furs, shorts, capes, pedal pushers, bathing suits, baby doll pajamas, sheaths-each outfit complete with appropriate accessories. There was a whole row of Barbie brides, though I’d never thought of her as married. The row below showed twenty Barbies uniformed as flight attendants and nurses, which must have represented the entire gambit of career options available to her. Some of the dolls were still in their boxes and some were freestanding, affixed to round plastic mounts. There was a row of seated Barbies-black, Hispanic, blonde, brunette-their long perfect legs extended like a chorus line, all shoeless, their unblemished limbs ending in nearly pointed toes. Their arms were long and impossibly smooth. Their necks must have contained extra vertebrae to support the weight of their tousled manes of hair. I confess I found myself at a loss for words. Homer leaned against the open door, watching for my reaction.I could tell something was expected of me so I said, “Amazing,” in what I hoped was a properly respectful tone.Homer laughed. “I thought you’d like that. I don’t know a woman alive who can resist a room full of dolls.”I said, “Ah.”Dolores glanced at me shyly. She had a doll in her lap, not a Barbie to all appearances, but some other type. With a little hammer and an X-acto knife, she was cutting open its stomach. There was a box of identical little plastic girls, sexless, unmarred, standing close together with their chests pierced in a pattern of holes like those old-fashioned radio speakers. Beside them, there was a box of little girls’ heads, eyes demurely closed, a smile turning up the corners of each set of perfect lips. “Chatty Cathys,” she said. “It’s a new hobby. I fix their voices so they can talk again.”“That’s great.”Homer said, “I’ll leave you girls to your own devices. You have a lot you want to talk about.”He closed me into the room with her, as pleased with himself as a parent introducing two new best friends to each other. Clearly, he hadn’t guessed my unfortunate history with surrogate children. My first, a Betsy Wetsy, if she’d survived, would have had to enter therapy at some point in her life. At age six, I thought it was a bore to be constantly feeding her those tiny bottles of water and it annoyed me no end every time she peed in my lap. Once I figured out it was the water, I quit feeding her altogether and then I used her as the pedestrian I ran over with my trike. This was my definition of motherly love and probably explains why I’m not a parent today.“How many Barbies do you have?” I asked, feigning enthusiasm for the little proto-women.“A little over two thousand. That’s the star of my collection, a number one Barbie still in her original package. The seal’s been broken, but she’s in near-mint condition. I’m afraid to tell you what I paid,” she said. Her speech was uninflected, her manner without affect. She made little eye contact, addressing most of her comments to the doll as she worked. “Homer’s always been very supportive.”“I can see that,” I said.“I’m a bit of a purist. A lot of collectors are interested in others in the line-you know, Francie, Tuttie and Todd, Jamie, Skipper, Christie, Cara, Casey, Buffy. I never cared for them myself. And certainly not Ken. Did you have a Barbie as a kid?”“I can’t say I did,” I said. I picked one up and examined her. “She looks like she’s suffering from some sort of eating disorder, doesn’t she? What prompted you to get into Chatty Cathys? That seems far afield for a Barbie purist.”“Most of the Chatties aren’t mine. I’m repairing them for a friend who runs a business doing this. It’s not as far-fetched as it seems. Chatty Cathy was introduced in 1960, the year after Barbie. Chatty Cathy was more realistic-freckles, buck teeth, little pot belly-this in addition to her ability to speak. Even with Barbie, 1967 to 1973 is known as the Talking Era, which includes the Twist ‘n’ Turn dolls. Few people realize that.”“I know I didn’t,” I said. “What’s that thing?”“That’s the little three-inch vinyl record of Cathy’s sayings. When you pull the string, it activates a spring that makes that little rubber belt drive the turntable. The early versions of the doll had eleven sayings, but that was increased to eighteen. Odd thing about Chatties is that no two look alike. Of course, they were mass-produced, but they all seem to be different. It’s almost creepy in some ways. Anyway, I’m sure you didn’t drive all the way down here to talk about dolls. You’re interested in my father.”“Homer filled me in, but I’d like to hear your version. I understand he and Alfie Toth spent some time with you just after they were released from Chino.”“That’s right. Pops was feeling sorry for himself because none of the other kids wanted anything to do with him. He tried to spend a night with my brother, Clint-he lives down in Inglewood by the L. A. airport. Clint’s still bitter about Pops. He refused to let him in, but he told him he could sleep in the toolshed if he wanted to. Pops was furious, of course, so he left in a huff, but not before he broke into Clint’s house. Him and Alfie waited ‘til Clint was gone, stole his cash, and busted up all his furniture.”“That must have been a big hit. Did Clint report it to the police?”Dolores seemed startled, the first real reaction I’d seen. “Why would he do that?”“I’ve heard there was a plainclothes detective trying to serve a warrant against Toth around the time of his death. I’m wondering if it dated back to that same incident.”Dolores shook her head. “I’m sure not. Clint would never do a thing like that. He might not want Pops in his house, but he’d never snitch on him. It’s odd, but when my sister Maine called-this was just about a year ago-to say they’d found his body, I started laughing so hard I peed my pants. Homer had to call the doctor when it turned out I couldn’t quit. Doctor gave me a shot to calm me down. He said it was hysteria, but it was actually relief. We hadn’t heard from him for five years by then so I guess I was waiting for the other shoe to drop.”“Why do you think he went from Clint’s to Lake Tahoe?”“My sister lives up there. Or one of them, at any rate. Not in Lake Tahoe exactly, but that vicinity.”“Really? I’ve been curious what prompted him to travel in that direction.”“I don’t think Maine’s husband was any happier to see him than Homer was.”“How long was he with her?”“A week or so. Maine told me later him and Alfie went off to go fishing and that’s the last anyone ever saw Pops as far as I know.”“Do you think I could talk to her? I’m sure the police have covered this ground, but it would be helpful to me.”“Oh, sure. She isn’t hard to find. She works as a clerk in the sheriff’s department up there.”“Up there where?”“Nota Lake. Her name is Margaret, but everybody in the family calls her Marne.”
