---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_019.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["like", "said", "know", "one", "could", "selma", "door", "back", "time", "two", "alfie", "house", "someone", "hatch", "see", "get", "think", "seemed", "window", "little", "table", "room", "tom", "across", "would"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit019html

---


Unknown
EIGHTEENThe ocean was white with fog, the horizon fading into milk a hundred yards offshore. The sun behind clouds created a harsh, nearly blinding light. Colors seemed flattened by the haze, which lent a chill to the air. A quick check of the weather channel before I’d departed showed heavy precipitation in the area of California where I was headed and within the first twenty-five miles, I could already begin to sense the shift.I took Highway 126 through Santa Paula and Fillmore until I ran into Highway S, where I doglegged over to Highway 14. I drove through canyon country balding, brown hills, tufted with chapparel, as wrinkled and hairy as elephants. Power lines marched across the folds of the earth while the highway spun six lanes of concrete through the cuts and crevices. Residential developments had sprung up everywhere, the ridges dotted with tract houses so that the natural rock formations looked strangely out of place. There was evidence of construction still in progress-earth movers, concrete mixers, temporary equipment yards enclosed in wire fencing in which heavy machinery was being housed for the duration. An occasional Porta-Potty occupied the wide aisle between lanes of the freeway. The land was the color of dry dirt and dried grass. Trees were few and didn’t seem to assert much of a presence out here.By the time I’d passed Edwards Air Force Base, driving in a straight line north, the sky was gray. The clouds collected in ascending layers that blocked out the fading sun overhead. The drizzle that began to fall looked more like a fine vapor sheeting through the air. Misty-looking communities appeared in the distance, flat and small, laid out in a grid, like an outpost on the moon. Closer to the road, there would be an occasional outbuilding, left over from god knows what decade. The desert, while unforgiving, nevertheless tolerates man-made structures, which remain-lopsided, with broken windows, roofs collapsing-long after the inhabitants have died or moved on. I could see the entire expanse of rain-swept plains to the rim of hushed buff-colored mountains. The telephone poles, extending into the horizon ahead of me, could have served as a lesson in perspective. Behind the barren, pointed hills, rugged granite out-croppings grew darker as the rain increased. Gradually, the road moved into the foothills. The mountains beyond them were imposing. Nothing marred the featureless, pale surface-no trees, no grass, no mark of human passage. At higher elevations, I could see vegetation where low-hanging clouds provided sufficient moisture to support growth.I’d tucked my semiautomatic in the duffel. The gun experts, Dietz among them, were quick to scoff at the little Davis, but it was a handgun I knew and it felt far more familiar to me than the Heckler and Koch, a more recent acquisition. Given the condition of my bunged up fingers, I doubted I’d be capable of pulling the trigger in any event, but the gun was a comfort in my current apprehensive state.Little by little, I was giving up my initial irritation with Selma. As with anything else, once a process is under way, there’s no point in railing against the Fates. I regretted that I hadn’t had time to contact Leland Peck, the clerk at the Gramercy Hotel. I’d taken his coworker’s word that he had nothing to report. Any good investigator knows better. I should have taken the trouble to look him up so I could quiz him about his recollections of the plainclothes detective with the warrant for Toth’s arrest.In the meantime, secure in my ignorance of events to come, I thought idly of the night ahead. I truly hate being a guest in someone’s home. The bed seldom suits me. The blankets are usually skimpy. The pillows are flat or made out of hard rubber that smells of half-deflated basketballs. The toilet refuses to flush fully or the handle gets stuck or the paper runs out so that you’re forced to search all the cabinets looking for the ever so cunningly hidden supply. Worst of all, you have to “make nice” at all hours. I don’t want someone across the table from me while I’m eating my breakfast. I don’t want to share the newspaper and I don’t want to talk to anyone at the end of the day. If I were interested in that shit, I’d be married again by now and put a permanent end to all the peace and quiet.By the time I arrived in Nota Lake at 6:45, night had settled on the landscape and the weather was truly nasty. The drizzle had intensified into a stinging sleet. My windshield wipers labored, collecting slush in an arc that nearly filled my windshield. My guess was the people of Nota Lake, like others in perpetually cold climates, had strategies for coping with the shifting character of snow. From my limited experience, the freezing rain seemed extremely hazardous, making the roadway as slick as a skating rink. In moments, I could feel the vehicle slide sideways and I slowed to a snail’s pace. At the road’s edge, the dead grass had stiffened, collecting feathery drifts of whirling snow. Selma had bullied me into having supper with her. I’m easily influenced in food matters, having been conditioned these past years by Rosie’s culinary imperiousness. When ordered about by any woman with a certain autocratic tone, I do as I’m told, largely helpless to resist.I parked out in front of Selma’s, snagged my duffel, and hurried to the front porch, head bent, shoulders hunched as though to avoid the combination of blowing rain and biting snow. I knocked politely, shifting impatiently from foot to foot until she opened the door. We exchanged the customary chitchat as I stepped into the foyer and dried my feet on a rag rug. I shrugged off my leather jacket and eased out of my shoes, conscious of the pristine carpet. The house was toasty warm, hazy from the cigarette smoke sealed into the winterproofed rooms. I shivered with belated relief at being out of the cold. I padded after Selma, who showed me to the guest room. “Take whatever time you need to freshen up and get settled. I cleared some space in the closet and emptied a drawer for your things. I’ll be out in the kitchen putting the finishing touches on supper. You know your way around, but don’t hesitate to holler if you need anything.”“Thanks.”Once the door closed behind me, I surveyed the room with dismay. The carpet here was hot pink, a cut-pile cotton shag. There was a four-poster bed with a canopy and a puffy, quilted spread of pink-and-white checked gingham. The same fabric continued in the dust ruffle and ruffled pillow shams, stacked three deep. A collection of six quilted teddy bears was grouped together in a window seat. The wallpaper was pink-and-white stripes with a floral border across the top. There was an old-fashioned vanity table with a padded seat and a pink-and-white ruffled skirt. Everything was trimmed in oversized white rickrack. The guest bath was an extension of this jaunty decorative theme, complete with a crocheted cozy for the extra roll of toilet paper. The room smelled as though it had been closed up for some time and the heat here seemed more intense than in the rest of the house. I could feel myself start to hyperventilate with the craving for fresh air.I crossed to the window, like a hot prowl thief trying to escape. I managed to inch up the sash, only to be faced with a seriously constructed double-glazed storm window. I worked at the latches until I loosened all of them. I gave the storm window a push and it fell promptly out of the frame and dropped into the bushes below. Oops. I stuck my head through the gap and let the blessed sleet blow across my face. The storm window had landed just beyond my grasp so I left it where it was, resting in the junipers. I lowered the sash again and adjusted the ruffled curtains so the missing storm window wasn’t evident. At least, at bedtime, I could sleep in a properly refrigerated atmosphere.Selma had urged me to freshen up and I used her advice to stall my return to the kitchen. I peed, washed my hands, and brushed my teeth, happy to occupy my time with these homely ablutions. I stood in the bathroom and stared at myself in the mirror, wondering if I’d ever develop an interest in the painful process of plucking my eyebrows. Not likely. My jaw was still bruised and I paused to admire the ever-changing hue. Then I stood in the bedroom and did a quick visual scan. I removed my handgun from the duffel and hid it between the mattress and the box springs near the head of the bed. This would fool no one, but it would allow me to keep the gun close. I didn’t think it would be wise to pack a rod in this town, especially without the proper permit. Finally, there was nothing for it but to take a deep breath and present myself at the supper table.Selma seemed subdued. Her attitude surprised me, given the fact that she’d gotten her way. I was back in Nota Lake, staying at her house, which was the last thing I wanted. “I kept everything simple. I hope you don’t mind,” she said.“This is fine,” I said.She took a moment to stub out her cigarette, blowing the final stream of smoke to one side. This, for a smoker, constitutes etiquette. We pulled out our chairs and took seats at the kitchen table.Given my usual diet, a home-cooked meal of any kind is an extraordinary treat. Or so I thought before I was faced with the one she’d prepared. This was the menu: iced tea with Sweet ‘N Low already mixed in, a green Jell-O square with fruit cocktail and an internal ribbon of Miracle Whip, iceberg lettuce with bottled dressing the color of a sunset. For the main course, instant mashed potatoes with margarine and a stout slice of meatloaf, swimming in diluted cream of mushroom soup. As I ate, my fork exposed a couple of pockets of dried mashed potato flakes. The meatloaf was strongly reminiscent of something served at the Perdido County jail, where there was an entire (much-dreaded) punishment referred to as being “on meatloaf.” On meatloaf means an inmate is placed on a diet of meatloaf and two slices of squishy white bread twice a day, with only drinking water from the faucet. The meatloaf, a six-inch patty made of turkey, kidney beans, and other protein-rich filler, is served on something nominally known as gravy. Every third day the law mandates that the inmate has to be served three square meals for one day, then back to meatloaf. By comparison to Selma’s version, a simple QP with cheese came off looking like a gourmet feast. Especially since I knew for a fact she didn’t feed Brant this way.Selma was quiet throughout the meal and I didn’t have much to contribute. I felt like one of those married couples you see out in restaurants-not looking at each other, not bothering to say a word. The minute we’d finished eating, she lit up another cigarette so I wouldn’t miss a minute of the tars and noxious gases wafting across the table. “Would you like coffee or dessert? I have a nice coconut cream pie in the freezer. It won’t take a minute to thaw. I can pop it in the microwave.”“Golly, I’m full. This was great.”“Are you cold? I saw you shiver. I can turn the heat up if you like.”“No, no. Really. I’m toasty warm. This was wonderful.”She tapped her cigarette ash on the edge of her plate. “I didn’t ask you about your fingers.”I held up my right hand. “They’re a little stiff yet, but better.”“Well, that’s good. Now that you’re back, what’s the plan?”“I was just thinking about that,” I said. “I’m not sure what to make of this and I don’t want it going any further, but I think I have a line on what was bothering Tom.”“Really?”“After we spoke this morning, I made another phone call. Without going into any detail...” I paused. “I’m not even sure how to tell you this. It seems awkward.”“For heaven’s sake. Just say it.”“It looks like Tom suspected a fellow officer in that double homicide he was investigating.”Selma looked at me, blinking, while she absorbed the information. She took a deep drag of her cigarette and blew out a sharp stream of smoke. “I don’t believe it.”“I know it sounds incredible, but stop and think about it for a minute. Tom was trying to establish the link between the two victims, right?”“Yes.”“Well, apparently he believed one of his colleagues lifted Alfie Toth’s address from his field notes. Toth was murdered shortly afterward. Toth was always on the move, but he’d just gotten out of jail and he was living temporarily in a fleabag hotel. This was the first time anyone had managed to pin him down to one location.No one else in Nota Lake knew where Alfie Toth was hanging out except him.”“What makes you so sure? He might have mentioned it to someone. Or someone else might have come up with the information independently,” she said.“You’re right about that. The point is, Tom must have gone crazy thinking he played a role in Alfie’s death. Worse yet, suspecting someone in the department had a hand in it.”“But you don’t really know,” she said. “This is just a guess on your part.”“How are we ever going to know anything unless someone ‘fesses up? And that seems unlikely. I mean, so far this ’someone’ has gotten away with it.”“Who told you this?”“Don’t worry about that. It was someone with the sheriff’s department. A confidential source.”“Confidential, my foot. You’re making a serious allegation.”“You think I don’t know that? Of course I am,” I said. “Look, I don’t like the idea any better than you do. That’s why I came back, to pin it down.”“And if you can’t?”“Then, frankly, I’m out of ideas. There is one possibility. Pinkie Ritter’s daughter, Margaret...”Selma frowned. “That’s right. I’d forgotten their relationship. The connection seems odd, what with her working for Tom.”“Nota Lake’s a small town. The woman has to work somewhere, so why not the sheriff’s department? Everybody else seems to work there,” I pointed out.“Why didn’t she speak up when you were here before?”“I didn’t know about Ritter until yesterday.”“I think you better talk to Rafer.”“I think it’s best to keep him out of this for now.” I caught the odd look that crossed her face. “What?”She hesitated. “I ran into him this afternoon and told him you’d be back this evening.”I felt my eyes roll in despair and I longed to bang my head on the table top just one time for emphasis. “I wish you’d kept quiet. It’s hard enough as it is. Everybody here knows everybody else’s business.”She waved aside my objection like a pesky horsefly sailing through the smoke-filled air. “Don’t be silly. He was Tom’s best friend. What will you do?”“I’ll talk to Margaret tonight and see what she knows,” I said. “After that, my only option is to go back to Santa Teresa and confer with the sheriff’s department there.”“And tell them what? You don’t have much.”“I don’t have anything,” I said. “Unless something develops, I’m at a dead loss.”“I see. Then I suppose that’s it.” Selma stubbed out her cigarette and got up without another word. She began to clear the dinner dishes, moving from the table to the sink.“Let me help you with that,” I said, getting up to assist.“Don’t trouble.” Her tone of voice was frosty, her manner withdrawn.I began to gather up plates and silverware, moving to the sink where she was already scraping leftover Jell-O into the garbage disposal. She ran water across a plate, opened the door to the dishwasher, and placed it in the lower rack. The silence was uncomfortable and the clattering of plates contained a note of agitation.“Is something on your mind?” I asked.“I hope I didn’t make a mistake in hiring you.”I glanced at her sharply. “I never offered you a guarantee. No responsible P. I. could make a promise like that. Sometimes the information simply isn’t there,” I said.“That’s not what I meant.”“Then what were you referring to?”“I never even asked you for references.”“A little late at this point. You want to talk to some of my past employers, I’ll make up a list.”She was silent again. I was having trouble tracking the change in her demeanor. Maybe she thought I was giving up. “I’m not saying I’ll quit,” I said.“I understand. You’re saying you’re out of your league.”“You want to go up against the cops? Personally, I’ve got more sense.”She banged a plate down so hard it broke down the middle into two equal pieces. “My husband died.”“I know that. I’m sorry.”“No, you’re not. Nobody gives a shit what I’ve gone through.”“Selma, you hired me to do this and I’m doing it. Yes, I’m out of my league. So was Tom, for that matter. Look what happened to him. It fuckin’ broke his heart.”She stood at the sink, letting the hot water run while her shoulders shook. Tears coursed along her cheeks. I stood there for a moment, wondering what to do. It seemed clear she’d go on weeping until I acted sincerely moved. I patted her awkwardly, making little murmurings. I pictured Tom doing much the same thing in his life, probably in this very spot. Water gurgled down the drain while the tears poured down her face. Finally, I couldn’t stand it. I reached over and turned off the water. Live through enough droughts, you hate to see the waste. Where originally her grief had seemed genuine, I now suspected the emotion was being hauled out for effect. At long last, with much blowing and peeking at her nose products, she pulled herself together. We finished up the dishes and Selma retreated to her room, emerging shortly afterward in her nightie and robe, intending to make herself a glass of hot milk and get in bed. I fled the house as soon as it was decently possible. Nothing like being around a self-appointed invalid to make you feel hard-hearted.Margaret and Hatch lived close to the center of town on Second Street. I’d called from Selma’s before I left the house. I’d scarcely identified myself when she cut in, saying, “Dolores said you came to see her. What’s this about?”In light of her father’s murder, the answer seemed obvious. “I’m trying to figure out what happened to your father,” I said. “I wondered if it’d be possible to talk to you tonight. Is this a bad time for you?”She’d seemed nonplussed at my request, conceding with reluctance. I couldn’t understand her attitude, but I wrote it off to my imagination. After all, the subject had to be upsetting, especially in light of his past abusiveness. Twice she put a palm across the mouthpiece and conferred with someone in the background. My assumption was that it was Hatch, but she made no specific reference to him.The drive over was uneventful, despite the treacherous roads and the continuous sleet. There was no accumulation of snow so far, but the pavement was glistening and my tires tended to sing every time I hit a slippery patch. I had to use the brakes judiciously, pumping gently from half a block back when I saw the stoplights ahead of me change. Paranoid as I was at that point, I did note the close proximity of the Brine’s house to the parking lot at Tiny’s Tavern where I’d been accosted. Once Wayne and Earlene dropped the Brines off at home, Hatch could easily have doubled back. I found myself scouring the streets for sight of a black panel truck, but of course saw nothing.I entered a tract of brick ranch houses maybe fifteen years old, judging from the maturity of the landscaping. Tree trunks were now sturdy, maybe eight inches in diameter, and the foundation plantings had long ago crept over the windowsills. I slowed when I spotted the house number. The Brines had two cars and a pickup truck parked in or near the drive. I found a parking spot two doors down and sat at the curb wondering if there was a party in progress. I turned in my seat and studied the house. There were dim lights in front, brighter lights around the side and toward the portion of the rear that I could see from my vantage point. This was Saturday night. She hadn’t mentioned a Tupperware party or Bible study, nor had she suggested I come at some other time. Maybe they were having friends in to watch a little network television. I debated with myself. I didn’t like the idea of walking into a social gathering, especially since I could always talk to her tomorrow. On the other hand, she’d said I could come and meeting with her tonight would delay my return to Selma’s. I still had a key to her place and the plan was for me to let myself in the front door whenever I got back that night. The car became noticeably colder the longer I sat. The neighborhood was quiet with little traffic and no one visible on foot. Someone peeking out the windows would think I’d come to case the joint.I got out of the car and locked the doors. The sidewalks must have been warmer than the streets. Snowflakes melted instantly, leaving shallow pools in lieu of icy patches. The trees in the yard were some deciduous variety, caught by surprise with tiny green buds in sight. March in this area must have been a constant series of nature pranks. I knocked on the door, hoping I wasn’t walking in on a naughty lingerie party. Maybe that’s why she’d invited me, in hopes I’d purchase a drawerful of underpants to replace all my tatty ones.Margaret opened the door wearing blue jeans and a thick, red sweater with a Nordic design across the front; snowflakes and reindeer. She wore clunky calf-high suede boots with a sheepskin lining that must have felt warm on a night like this. With her black hair and oval glasses, she looked like a teenager hired to babysit. “Hi. Come on in.”“Thanks. I hope I’m not interrupting. I saw cars in the drive.”“Hatch’s poker night. The boys are in the den,” she said, hooking a thumb toward the rear. “I’m on kitchen detail. We can talk out there.”Like Selma’s house, this one smelled as if it had been sealed for the winter, the rubber gaskets on the storm windows insuring the accumulation of smoke and cooking smells. The wall-to-wall carpet was a burnt orange high-low, the walls in the living room painted a shade of cafe au lait. The eight-foot sofa was a chocolate brown with two black canvas butterfly chairs arranged on either side of the coffee table. “You didn’t have any trouble finding the place?” she asked.“Not at all,” I said. “You prefer Margaret or Maine? I know Dolores refers to you as Maine.”“Either one is fine. Suit yourself.”I followed her to the kitchen at the end of the hall. She was in the process of preparing food, platters of cold cuts on the long wood-grained Formica counter. There were bowls of chips, two containers of some kind of dip made with sour cream, and a mixture of nuts and Chex cereals tossed with butter and garlic powder. I know this because all the ingredients were still in plain view. “If you’ll help me move these snacks to the dining room, we can get ’em out of the way and we can talk.”“Sure thing.”She picked up two bowls and shoved the swinging door open with a hip, holding it for me while I moved through with the tray of sliced cheeses and processed meats. Of course, it was all so unwholesome I was immediately hungry, but my appetite didn’t last long. Through an archway to my left, I saw Hatch and his five buddies sitting on metal folding chairs at the poker table in the den. There were countless beer bottles and beer mugs in evidence, cigarettes, ashtrays, poker chips, dollar bills, coins, bowls of peanuts. To a man, the entire gathering turned to look at me. I recognized Wayne, James Tennyson and Brant; the other two fellows I’d never seen before. Hatch made a comment and James laughed. Brant raised his hand in greeting. Margaret paid little attention to the lot of them, but the chill from the room was unmistakable.I placed bowls on the table and moved back to the kitchen, trying to behave as though unaffected by their presence. Here’s the truth about my life. Just about any jeopardy I encounter in adulthood I experienced first in elementary school. Guys making private jokes have struck me as sinister since I was forced to pass the sixth-grade boys every morning on my way to “kinney garden.” Even then, I knew no good could come of such assemblages and I avoid them where possible.I picked up a platter from the kitchen counter and intercepted Margaret as she reached the swinging door. “Why don’t I pass these to you and you can put them on the table,” I said, feigning helpfulness. In truth, I couldn’t bear subjecting myself to that collective stare.She took the platter without comment, holding the door open with her hip. “You might want to open a couple more beers. There’s some on the bottom shelf of the refrigerator out on the utility porch.”I found six bottles of beer and the beer flip and made myself useful removing caps. Once we’d assembled the eats, Margaret pulled the swinging door shut and sighed with relief. “Lucky they don’t play more than once a month,” she said. “I told Hatch they should rotate, but he likes to have ’em here. Usually Earlene tags along with Wayne and helps me set up, but she’s coming down with a cold and I told her to stay home. Shit... excuse my language... I forgot to put out the paper plates. I’ll be right back.” She snatched up a giant package of flimsy paper plates and moved toward the dining room. “You want anything to eat, you can help yourself,” she said. As I was still burping meatloaf, I thought it wise to decline.She came back to the kitchen and tossed the cellophane packaging in the trash, then turned and leaned against the counter, crossing her arms in front. “What can I help you with?” The question suggested cooperation, but her manner was all business.“I’m just wondering what you can tell me about his last visit. I’m assuming he and Alfie Toth came to the area to see you that spring.”“That’s right,” she said. As though to distract herself, she began to screw lids on the pickle jars, stowing mustard and mayonnaise back in the refrigerator. “I hope you don’t think this is disrespectful, but my father was a loser and we all knew that. Truthfully, I was happiest when he was in jail. He always seemed to cause trouble.”“Was he a problem on this visit?”“Of course. Mostly chasing women. Like any woman here was that hard up,” she said.“From what little I know, I never pictured him as a ladies’ man.”“He wasn’t, but he’d just gotten out of jail and he was itching to get laid. He’d be at Tiny’s at four, the minute the doors opened. Once he started drinking, he’d hit on anyone who crossed his path. He thought he was irresistible and he’d be angry and combative when his ham-handed flirtations didn’t net him what he wanted.”“Anybody in particular?”Margaret shrugged. “A waitress at the Rainbow and one at Tiny’s. Alice, the one with red hair.”“I know her,” I said.“That’s all he talked about, how horny he was. Poontang, he called it. I was embarrassed. I mean, what kind of talk is that coming from your dad? He couldn’t have been more obnoxious. He got in fights. He borrowed money. He dinged the truck. People around here won’t tolerate behavior like that. It drove Hatch insane so, of course, the two of us were fighting. Hatch wanted them out of here and I can’t say I blamed him. What are you going to do though, your own dad? I could hardly ask him to leave. He’d been here less than a week.”“So what finally happened?”“We sent him and Alfie off on a fishing trip. Anything to get them out from underfoot for a couple of days. Hatch lent ’em a couple of fishing rods he never did get back. He was p. o.’d about that. Anyway, I don’t know what happened, but something must have gone wrong. Next morning, Alfie showed up and said they’d decided to take off and he’d come for their things.”“Where was your father?”“Alfie told us Daddy was waiting for him and he had to get a move on or Pinkie’d be furious with him. I didn’t think anything about it. I mean, it did sound like him. He was always trying to get Alfie to fetch and carry for him.”“Did Tom know all this?”“I told him in March when Daddy’s remains turned up. Once the body was identified, Tom notified me and I passed the news on to the rest of the family. Before that, as far as I knew, Dad was fine.”“Didn’t it strike you as odd that no one in the family ever heard from him once he supposedly left here?”“Why should it? Bad news travels fast. We always figured if something happened to him, someone would be in touch. Police or a hospital. He always carried ID. Besides, we heard from Alfie now and then. I guess the two of them split up, or that’s the impression he gave.”“Why did he call?”Margaret shrugged. “Beats me. Just to see how we were doing is what he said.”“Did he ever ask about your dad?”“Well, yes, but it wasn’t like he really wanted to get in touch. You know how it is. How’s your dad?...What do you hear from him?... And that sort of thing.”“So he was wondering if Pinkie ever showed up again. Is that it?”“I guess. Finally, he stopped calling and we lost touch with him.”“Maybe he realized Pinkie wasn’t ever going to put in an appearance.”“That’s what Tom said. He thought Daddy might have been murdered the very day Alfie left, though there was never any way to prove it. One thing they found was a gas receipt he’d tucked in his pocket. That was dated the day before. Him and Alfie filled up the tank on their way to the lake. You think Alfie knew something?”“Almost certainly,” I said.“Maybe the two of them quarreled.”“It’s always possible,” I said. “Judging from his behavior, he was either trying to create the impression that Pinkie was alive, or he really wasn’t sure himself.The last time you saw him... when he stopped by to pick up their belongings... did he seem okay to you?”“Like what?”“He wasn’t nervous or in a hurry?”“He was in a hurry for sure, but no more than he’d be with Daddy waiting.”“Any signs he’d been in a scuffle?”“Nothing that I noticed. There wasn’t any dirt or scratches.”“How did they plan to travel? Bus, train, plane? Hitchhiking?”“They must have gone by bus. I mean, that was my assumption because the truck was left over at the Greyhound station. Hatch spotted it in the parking lot later that same day,” she said.
