---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_010.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["could", "door", "hand", "cabin", "back", "iron", "finger", "time", "head", "across", "sound", "picked", "around", "face", "window", "got", "side", "left", "hear", "felt", "chair", "went", "feel", "one", "make"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit010html

---


Unknown
NINEI went back to the motel, making a brief detour into the Rainbow Cafe, where I picked up a pack of chips and a can of Pepsi. I was eating for comfort, but I couldn’t help myself. I hadn’t jogged for three weeks and I could feel my ass getting larger with every bite I ate. The young black woman who handled the griddle had paused to follow the weather channel on a small color television at the end of the counter. She was trim and attractive with loopy corkscrew curls jutting out around her head. I saw a frown cross her face when she saw what was coming up. “Hey now. I’m sick of this. Whatever happened to spring?” she asked of no one in particular.Out in the Pacific, the radar showed the same clustered pattern of color as a CAT scan of the brain, areas of storm activity represented in shades of blue, green, and red. I was hoping to hit the road for home before the bad weather reached the area. March was unpredictable, and a heavy snowstorm could force the mountain passes to close. Nota Lake was technically located out of the reach of such blockades, but the rental car had no chains and I had scant experience driving in hazardous conditions.Back in the cabin, I finished typing up my notes, translating all the pointless activity into the officious sounding language of a written report. What ended up on paper didn’t add up to anything because I’d neatly omitted the as-yet-unidentified female sheriff’s investigator, who may or may not have been interested in Tom Newquist and he in her. San Benito or Kern County, yeah, right, Macon.At two, I decided to make a trip to the copy shop in town. I locked the cabin behind me and headed for my car. Cecilia must have been peering out the office window because the minute I walked by, she rapped on the glass and made a beckoning motion. She came to the door, holding a piece of paper aloft. Cecilia was so small she must have been forced to buy her clothes in the children’s department. Today’s outfit consisted of a long red sweatshirt with a teddy bear appliquéd on the front worn over white leggings, with a pair of enormous jogging shoes. Her legs looked as spindly as a colt’s, complete with knobby knees. “You had a telephone call. Alice wants you to get in touch. I took the number this time, but in future, she ought to try reaching you at Selma’s. I run a motel here, not an answering service.”Her aggrieved tone was irritating and inspired a matching complaint. “Oh, hey, now that I’ve got you, do you think I could get some heat? The cabin’s almost unliveable, close to freezing,” I said.An expression of annoyance flashed across her face. “March first is the cutoff date for heating oil out here. I can’t just whistle up delivery because a couple of short term visitors to the area make a minor fuss.” Her tone suggested she’d been beleaguered with grumbles the better part of the day.“Well, do what you can. I’d hate to have to complain to Selma when she’s footing the bill.”Cecilia gave the door a little bang as she withdrew. Good luck to me, getting any other messages. I crossed to the pay phone and stood there, searching for change in the bottom of my handbag. I found a little cache of coins tucked in one corner along with assorted hairs and a ratty tissue. I dropped some money in the slot and dialed. Alice picked up on the fourth ring just about the time I expected her machine to kick in. “Hello?”“Hello, Alice? Kinsey Millhone. I got your message. Are you at work or home?”“Home. I’m not due at Tiny’s until four. I was in the process of setting my hair. Hang on a sec while I get the curlers out on this side. Ah, better. Nothing like a set of bristles sticking in your ear. Listen, this might not be helpful, but I thought I’d pass it along. The waitress who works counter over at the Rainbow is a good friend of mine. Her name’s Nancy. I mentioned Tom and told her what you were up to. She says he came in that night about eight-thirty and left just before closing. You can talk to her yourself if you want.”“Is she the black girl?”“Nuhn-uhn. That’s Barrett, Rafer LaMott’s daughter. Nancy doubles as a cashier. Brown hair, forties. I’m sure you’ve seen her in there because she’s seen you.”“What else did she say? Was he alone or with someone?”“I asked that myself and she says he was alone, at least as far as she could see. Said he had a cheeseburger and fries, drank some coffee, played some tunes on the jukebox, paid his ticket, and left about nine-thirty, just as she was closing out the register. Like I said, it might not mean anything, but she said she’d never known him to come in at that hour. You know the night he was found, he was out on 395, but he was heading toward the mountains instead of home to his place.”“I remember that,” I said. “The coroner mentioned his having eaten a meal. According to Selma, he was in for the night. He didn’t even leave a note. By the time she got back from church, he was DOA at the local emergency room. Maybe he got a phone call and went to meet someone.”“Or maybe he just got hungry, hon. Selma’s the type who’d make him eat veggies and brown rice. He could have sneaked out for something decent.” She laughed at herself. “I always said the food out there would kill you. I’ll bet his arteries seized up from all the fat he took in.”“At least we know where he was in the hour just before he died.”“Well, that’s hardly news. Nancy says the coroner covered the same ground. Anyways, I told you it wouldn’t count for much. I guess that about says it for my detective career.”“You never know. Oh, one more thing as long as I have you on the line. You ever hear rumors about Tom and any other woman?”She barked out a laugh. “Tom? You gotta be kidding. He was stuffy about sex. Lot of guys, you can tell just by looking they got a problem around dominance. Ass grabbers and pinchers, fellows telling dirty jokes and gawking at your boobs. They wouldn’t mind a quick bounce on the front seat of their pickups, but believe me, romance is the fartherest thing from their minds. Tom was always pleasant. I’ve never known him to flirt and I never heard him make any kind of off-color remark. What makes you ask?”“I thought he might have been at the Rainbow for a rendezvous.”“Oh, a rendezvous. That’s rich. Listen, if you’re fooling around in this town, you’d best meet somewhere else unless you want everyone to know. Why take the risk? If his sister’d showed up, she’d have spotted him first thing. Cecilia’s not that fond of Selma, but she’d have told on him anyway. That’s how people around here operate. Anything you find out is fair game.”“I take it word’s gone out about me.”“You bet.”“What’s the consensus? Anybody seem upset?”“Oh, grumbles here and there. You’re picking up notice, but nothing serious that I’ve heard. Town this size, everybody has an opinion about something especially fresh blood like yours. Some of the guys were wondering if you’re married. I guess they noticed no wedding ring.”“Actually, I took my ring off to have the diamond reset.”“Bullshit.”“No, really. My husband’s huge. He’s always pumped up on steroids so he’s touchy as all get out. He’d tear the head off anyone who ever laid a hand on me.”She laughed. “I bet you’ve never been married a day in your life.”“Alice, you would be surprised.”As predicted, the weather was turning nasty as the front moved in. The morning had been clear, the temperatures in the fifties, but by early afternoon, a thick mass of clouds had accumulated to the north. The sky changed from blue to a uniform white, then to a misty-looking dark gray, which made the day seem as gloomy as a solar eclipse. All the mountain peaks had been erased and the air became dense with a fine, biting spray.Here’s what I did with my afternoon. I drove into town and went to the copy shop, where I made copies of my typewritten report and several cropped five-by-seven photocopy enlargements made of the head shot of Tom Newquist. I dropped the original photograph and the original of my report in Selma’s mailbox, drove six blocks over, and left the flashlight inside the storm door on James Tennyson’s front porch. And I still had hours to kill before I could decently retire.In the meantime, I was bored and I wanted to get warm. Nota Lake didn’t have a movie theater. Nota Lake didn’t have a public library or a bowling alley that I could spot. I went to the lone bookstore and wandered up and down the aisles. The place was small but attractive, and the stock was more than adequate. I picked up two paperbacks, returned to the cabin, crawled under a pile of blankets, and read to my heart’s content.At six, I hunched into my jacket and walked over to the Rainbow through an odd mix of blowing sleet and buffeting rain. I ate a BLT on wheat toast and then chatted idly with Nancy while she rang up my bill. I already knew what she had to say, but I quizzed her nonetheless, making sure Alice had reported accurately. At 6:35, I went back to the cabin, finished the first book, tossed that aside, and reached for the next. At ten o’clock, exhausted from a hard day’s work, I got up, brushed my teeth, washed my face, and climbed back in bed, where I fell promptly asleep.A sound filtered into the tarry dream I was having. I labored upward, slow swimming, my body weighted with dark images and all the leaden drama of sleep. I felt glued to the bed. My eyes opened and I listened, not even sure where I was. Nota Lake crept back into my consciousness, the cabin so cold I might as well have slept outside. What had I heard? I turned my head with great effort. According to the clock, it was 4:14, still pitch black. The tiny scrape of metal on metal... not the sound of a key... possibly a pick being worked into the door lock. Fear shot through me like a bottle rocket, lighting my insides with a shower of adrenaline. I flung the covers aside. I was still fully dressed, but the chill in the cabin was numbing to both my face and my hands. I swung my legs over the side of the bed, felt for my shoes, and shoved my feet in without bothering to tie the laces.I stood where I was, tuned now to the silence. Even in the depths of the country with minimal light pollution, I realized the dark wasn’t absolute. I could see the blocks of six lighter gray squares that were the windows on three sides. I glanced back at the bed, empty white sheets advertising my departure. Hastily, I arranged the pillows to form a plump body shape, which I covered with my blankets. This always fooled the bad guys. I eased over to the door, trying to pick up the scratchings of my intruder over the pounding of my heart. I felt along the door jamb. There was no security chain so once the lock was jimmied, there was nothing else between me and my night visitor. The cabin, though dark, was beginning to define itself. I surveyed the details in memory, looking for a weapon somewhere among the homely furnishings. Bed, chair, soap, table, shower curtain. On my side of the door, I kept my fingers on the thumblock to prevent its turning. Maybe the guy would assume his skills were rusty or the lock was stiff. On the other side of the door, I could hear a faint chunking across wood chips as my visitor retreated in search of some other means of ingress. I tiptoed to the table and picked up a wooden chair. I returned to the door and eased the top rail under the knob, jamming the legs against the floor. It wouldn’t hold for long, but it might slow him down. I took a brief moment to bend down and tie my shoes, unwilling to risk the sound of my laces clicking across the expanse of bare wooden floor. I could hear faint sounds outside as the intruder patiently circled the cabin.Were the windows locked? I couldn’t recall. I moved from window to window, feeling for the shape of the latches. All of them seemed to be secured. A slight parting of the curtains allowed me a thin slice of the exterior. I could see dense Christmas tree shapes, a series of evergreens that dotted the landscape. No traffic on the highway. No lights in neighboring cabins. To the left, I caught movement as someone disappeared around the side of the cabin toward the rear.I crossed the room in silence, entering the darker confines of the bathroom. I felt for the shower curtain, hanging by a series of rings from a round metal rod. I let my fingers explore the brackets, which were screwed into the wall on either side of the shower stall. Carefully, I lifted the rod from the slots, sliding the curtain off, ring by ring. Once in hand, I realized the rod was useless, too light, too easily bent. I needed a weapon, but what did I have? I glanced at the frosted glass of the bathroom window, which appeared infinitesimally paler than the dark of the wall surrounding it. Framed in the center was the intruder’s head and shoulders. He cupped his hands to the glass to afford himself a better look. It must have been frustrating to discover the dark was too dense to penetrate. I stood without moving though I could see his movements outside. A snippet of sound, perhaps the faint scrape of a clawhammer being eased into crack between the frame and the glass.Feverishly, I reviewed the items in the cabin, hoping to remember something I could use as a weapon. Toilet paper, rug, clothes hangers, ironing board. Iron. I set the curtain rod aside, taking care not to make a sound. I moved to the closet, feeling through the dark until my forgers encountered the ironing board. I raised up on tiptoe and lifted the iron from the shelf above, shielding the contours with my hand so as to avoid banging into anything. I searched for the end of the plug, holding the prongs while I unwrapped the cord. Blindly, I felt for the outlet near the sink, inserted the prongs, and slid the heat lever on the iron as far to the right as it would go. I set the iron upright on the counter. I glanced back at the window. The head-and-shoulders silhouette was no longer visible.I eased my way across the room to the door, where I leaned closer and pressed my ear to the lock, trying not to disturb the chair. I could hear the key pick slide in again. I could hear the tiny torque wrench join its mate as the two rods of metal crept across the tumblers. Behind me, I could hear a ticking from the bathroom as the iron picked up heat. I’d rammed the setting up to LINEN, a fabric known to wrinkle more easily than human flesh. I longed to feel the weight of the iron in my hand, but I didn’t dare yank the plug from the socket just yet. I could feel pain in my chest where the rubbery muscle of my heart slapped the wooden pales of my rib cage. I’d picked many a lock myself and I was well acquainted with the patience required for the task. I’d never known anyone who could use a lockpick wearing gloves, so the chances were he was using his bare hands. From the depths of the lock, I fancied I could hear the pick ease across the tumblers and lift them one by one.I placed my right hand lightly on the knob. I could feel it turn under my fingers. With the chair still in place, I did a quick tiptoe dance across the room to the bath. I could feel heat radiating from the iron as I pulled the plug from the socket. I wrapped my fingers around the handle and returned to the door, taking up my vigil. My night visitor was now in the process of easing the door open, probably fearful of creaks that might alert me to his presence. I stared at the doorframe, willing him to appear. He pushed. The chair began to inch forward. As stealthily as a spider, his fingers crept around the frame. I lunged, iron extended. I thought my timing was good, but he was quicker than I expected. I made contact, but not before he’d kicked the door in. The chair catapulted past me. I could smell the harsh chemical scent of scorched wool. I pressed the iron into him again and sensed burning flesh this time. He uttered a harsh expletive-not a word but a yelp.At the same time, he swung and his fist caught me in the face. I staggered backward, off balance. The iron flew out of my hand and clattered heavily across the floor. He was fast. Before I knew what was happening, he’d kicked my feet out from under me. I went down. He had my arm racked up behind me, his knee planted squarely in the middle of my back. His weight made breathing problematic and I knew within minutes I’d black out if he didn’t ease up. I couldn’t fill my lungs with sufficient air to make a sound. Any movement was excruciating. I could smell stress sweat, but I wasn’t sure if it was his or mine.Now you see? This is precisely the kind of moment I was talking about. There I was, face down on Cecilia Boden’s bad braided rug, immobilized by a fellow threatening serious bodily harm. Had I foreseen this sorry development the day I left Carson City, I’d have done something else... dumped the rental car and flown home, bypassing the notion of employment in Nota Lake. But how was I to know?Meanwhile, the thug and I were at a temporary impasse while he decided what kind of punishment to inflict. This guy was going to hurt me, there was no doubt of that. He hadn’t expected resistance and he was pissed off that I’d put up even so puny a fight as I had. He was supercharged, juiced up on rage, his breathing labored and hoarse. I tried to relax and, at the same time, steal myself for the inevitable. I waited for a bash on the back of the head. I prayed that a pocketknife or semiautomatic didn’t appear on his list of preferred weapons. If he yanked my head back, he could slit my throat with one quick swipe of a blade. Time hung suspended in a manner that was almost liberating.I’m not a big fan of torture. I’ve always understood that in situations of extreme duress-offered the choice between, say, a hot poker in the eyeball or betraying a friend-I’d rat out my pal. This is one more reason to keep others at a distance, since I clearly can’t be trusted to keep a confidence. Under the current circumstances, I surely would have begged for mercy if I’d been capable of speech.Hostility energizes. Once unleashed, anger is addicting and the high, while bitter, is irresistible. He half-lifted himself away from me and slammed his knee into my rib cage, knocking the breath out of me. He grabbed the index finger of my right hand and in one swift motion snapped it sideways, dislocating the finger at what I later learned was the proximal interphalangeal joint. The sound was like the hollow pop of a raw carrot being snapped in two. I heard myself emit a note of anguish, high pitched and ragged as he reached for the next finger and popped the knuckle sideways in its socket. I could sense that both fingers protruded now in an unnatural relationship to the rest of my hand. He delivered a kick and then I heard his heavy breathing as he stood staring down at me. I closed my eyes, fearful of provoking further attack.I kept my face down against the rug, sucking in the odor of damp cotton fiber saturated with soot, feeling absurdly grateful when he didn’t kick me again. He crossed the cabin in haste. I heard the door bang shut behind him and then the sound of his muffled footsteps as they faded away. In due course, at a distance, I heard a car engine start. I was alive. I was hurt. Time to move, I thought.I rolled over on my back, cradling my right arm. I could feel my hands tremble and I was making noises in my throat. I’d broken out in a sweat, so much heat coursing through my body that I thought I’d throw up. At the same time, I began to shake. A stress-induced personality had separated herself from the rest of me and hovered in the air so that she could comment on the situation without having to participate in my pain and humiliation.You really should get help, she suggested. The injuries won’t kill you, but the shock well could. Remember the symptoms? Pulse and breathing become faster. Blood pressure drops. Weakness, lethargy, a little clamminess? Does that ring a bell here?I was laboring to breathe, struggling to keep my wits about me while my vision brightened and narrowed. It had been a long time since I’d been hurt and I’d nearly forgotten how it felt to be consumed by suffering. I knew he could have killed me, so I should have been happy this was the worst he’d conjured up. What exhilaration he must have felt. I had been brought low and my attempts at self-defense seemed pathetic in retrospect.I held my hand against my chest protectively while I eased onto my side and from there to my knees. I pushed upward with left elbow, supporting myself clumsily as I struggled to my feet. I was mewing like a kitten. Tears stung my eyes. I felt abased by the ease with which I’d been felled. I was nothing, a worm he could have crushed underfoot. My cockiness had left me and now belonged to him. I pictured him grinning, even laughing aloud as he sped down the highway. He would shake his fist in the air with joy, reliving my subjugation in much the same way I would in the days to come.I turned on the overhead light and looked down at my hand. Both my index finger and my insult finger jutted out at thirty-degree angles. I really couldn’t feel much, but the sight of it was sickening. I found my bag near the bed. I picked up my jacket and laid it across my shoulders like a shawl. Oddly, the cabin wasn’t that disordered. The iron had been flung into the far corner of the room. The wooden chair had been knocked over and the braided rug was askew. Tidy little bun that I am, I righted the chair and flopped the rug back into place, picked the iron up and returned it to the top closet shelf, cord dangling. Now I had only myself to accommodate.I locked the cabin with effort, using the unaccustomed left hand. I headed toward the motel office. The night was cold and a soft whirl of snow whispered against my face. I drank deeply of the cold, refreshed by the dampness in the air. Out near the road, I could see the glow of the motel vacancy sign, a red neon beacon issuing its invitation to passing motorists. There was no traffic on the highway. None of the other cabins showed any signs of life. Through the office window, I could see a table lamp aglow. I went in. I leaned against the doorframe while I knocked on Cecilia’s door. Long minutes passed. Finally, the door opened a crack and Cecilia peered out.I could hear the mounting roar of a fainting spell rising around my ears. I longed to sit down and put my head down between my knees. I took a deep breath, shaking my head in hopes of clearing it.Still squinting, she tied the sash of her pink chenille robe as she emerged. “What’s this about?” she said, crossly. “What’s the matter with you?”I held up my hand. “I need help.”
