---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_018.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["said", "tom", "could", "get", "think", "know", "like", "one", "see", "well", "anything", "going", "someone", "got", "time", "go", "guy", "back", "nota", "talk", "tell", "still", "maybe", "lake", "thing"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit018html

---


Unknown
SEVENTEENWhen I got home, Henry was in the backyard, kneeling in the flower bed. I crossed the lawn, pausing to watch him at work. He was aware of my presence, but seemed content with the quiet. He wore a white T-shirt and farmer’s pants with padded knees. His feet were bare, long, and bony, the high arches very white against the faded grass. The air was sweet and mild. Even with the noon sun directly overhead, the temperature was moderate. I could already see crocuses and hyacinths coming up in clusters beside the garage. I sat down on a wooden lawn chair while he turned the soil with a hand trowel. The earth was soft and damp, worms recoiling from the intrusion when his efforts disturbed them. His rose bushes were barren sticks, bristling with thorns, the occasional leaf bud suggesting that spring was on its way. The lawn, which had been dormant much of the winter, was beginning to waken with the encouragement of recent rains. I could see a haze of green where the new blades were beginning to push up through the brown. “People tend to associate autumn with death, but spring always seems a lot closer to me,” he remarked.“Why’s that?”“There’s no deep philosophical significance. Somehow in my history, a lot of people I love have ended up dying this time of year. Maybe they yearn to look out the window and see new leaves on the trees. It’s a time of hope and that might be enough if you’re on your way out; allows you to let go, knowing the world is moving on as it always has.”“I have to go back to Nota Lake,” I said.“When?”“Sometime next week. I’d like to hang out here long enough to get my hand back in working order.”“Why go at all?”“I have to talk to someone.”“Can’t you do that by phone?”“It’s too easy for people to tell lies on the phone. I like to see faces,” I said. I was silent, listening to the homely chucking of his trowel in the dirt. I pulled my legs up and wrapped my arms around my knees. “Remember in the old days when we talked about vibes?”I could see Henry smile. “You have bad vibes?”“The worst.” I held up my right hand and tried flexing the fingers, which were still so swollen and stiff I could barely make a fist.“Don’t go. You don’t have anything to prove.”“Of course I do, Henry. I’m a girl. We’re always having to prove something.”“Like what?”“That we’re tough. That we’re as good as the guys, which I’m happy to report is not that hard.”“If it’s true, why do you have to prove it?”“Comes with the turf. just because we believe it, doesn’t mean guys do.”“Who cares about men? Don’t be macha.”“I can’t help it. Anyway, this isn’t about pride. This is about mental health. I can’t afford to let some guy intimidate me like that. Trust me, somewhere up in Nota Lake he’s laughing his ass off, thinking he’s run me out of town.”“The Code of the West. A girl’s gotta do what a girl’s gotta do.”“It feels bad. The whole thing. I don’t remember feeling this much dread. That son of a bitch hurt me. I hate giving him the opportunity to do it again.”“At least your tetanus shot’s up to date.”“Yeah, and my butt still hurts. I got a knot on my hip the size of a hard-boiled egg.”“So what worries you?”“What worries me is I got my fingers dislocated before I knew jack-shit. Now that I’m getting closer, what’s the guy going to do? You think he’ll go down without trying to take me with him?”“Phone’s ringing,” he remarked.“God, Henry. How can you hear that? You’re eighty-six years old.”“Three rings.”I was off the chair and halfway across the yard by then. I left my door open and caught the phone on the fly, just as the machine kicked in. I pressed STOP, effectively cutting off the message. “Hello, hello, hello.”“Kinsey, is that you? I thought this was your machine.”“Hi, Selma. You lucked out. I was out in the yard.”“I’m sorry to have to bother you.”“Not a problem. What’s up?”“Someone’s been searching Tom’s study. I know this sounds odd, but I’m sure someone came in here and moved the items on his desk. It’s not like the room was trashed, but something’s off. I can’t see that anything’s missing and I don’t know how I’d prove it even if there was.”“How’d they get in?”She hesitated. “I was only gone for an hour, maybe slightly more. I hardly ever lock the door for short periods like that.”“What makes you so sure someone was there?”“I can’t explain. I’d been sitting in Tom’s den earlier, before I went out. I was feeling depressed and it seemed like a comfort just to sit in his chair. You know how it is when you think about things. You’re aware of your surroundings because your gaze tends to wander while your mind is elsewhere. I guess I was realizing how much work you’d done. Anyway, when I got home, I set my handbag on the kitchen table and went back to the car. I’d picked up some boxes to finish packing Tom’s books. The minute I walked into his den I could see the difference.”“You haven’t had any visitors?”“Oh, please. You know how people have been treating me. I might as well hang out a sign... ‘Town siren. Straying husbands apply here.”’“What about Brant? How do you know he wasn’t in there looking for something on Tom’s desk?”“I asked him, but he was at Sherry’s until a few minutes ago. I had him check the perimeter, but there’s no sign of forced entry.”“Who’d bother to force entrance with all the doors unlocked?” I said. “Can Brant tell if anything’s missing?”“He’s in the same boat I’m in. It’s certainly nothing obvious, if it’s anything at all. Whoever it was seemed to work with great care. It was only coincidental that I’d been in there this morning or I don’t think I’d have noticed. Do you think I should call the sheriff’s office?”“Yeah, you better do that,” I said. “Later, if it turns out something’s been stolen, you can follow up.”“That’s what Brant said.” There was a tiny pause while she changed tacks, her voice assuming a faintly injured tone. “I must say, I’ve been upset about your lack of communication. I’ve been waiting to hear from you.”“Sorry, but I haven’t had the chance. I was going to call you in a bit,” I said. I noticed how defensive I sounded in response to her reproof.“Now that I have you on the line, could you tell me what’s happening? I assume you’re still working even if you haven’t kept in touch.”“Of course.” I controlled my desire to bristle and I filled her in on my activities the past day and a half, sidestepping the personal aspects of Tom’s relationship with Colleen Sellers. Telling a partial truth is much harder than an outright lie. Here I was, trying to protect her, while she was chiding me for neglect. Talk about ungrateful. I was tempted to tell all, but I repressed the urge. I kept my tone of voice professional, while my inner kid hollered Up yours. “Tom came down here in June as part of an investigation. Do you remember the occasion? He was probably gone overnight.”“Yes,” she said, slowly. “It was two days. What’s the relevance?”“There was a homicide down here Tom felt was connected to some skeletal remains found in Nota County last spring.”“I know the case you’re referring to. He didn’t say much about it, but I know it bothered him. What about it.?”“Well, if we’re talking about an active homicide investigation, I don’t have the authority. I’m a private investigator, which is the equivalent of doing freelance research. I can’t, even on your say-so, stick my nose into police business.”“I don’t see why not. Surely, there’s no law against asking questions.”“I have asked questions and I’m telling you what I found. Tom was stressed out about matters that had nothing to do with you.”” Why didn’t he tell me what it was, if that’s true?”“You were the one who said he played things close to his chest, especially when it came to work.”“Well yes, but if this is strictly professional, then why would someone go to all the trouble to search the house?”“Maybe the department needed his notes or his files or a telephone number or a missing report. It could be anything,” I said, rattling off the possibilities as quickly as they occurred to me.“Why didn’t they call and ask?”“How do I know? Maybe they were in a hurry and you weren’t home,” I said, exasperated. It all sounded lame, but she was backing me into corners and it was annoying me no end.“Kinsey, I am paying you to get to the bottom of this. If I’d known you weren’t going to help, I could have used that fifteen hundred dollars to get my teeth capped.”“I’m doing what I can! What do you want from me?” I said.“Well, you needn’t take that attitude. A week ago, you were cooperative. Now all I’m hearing are excuses.”I had to bite my tongue. I had to talk in very distinct, clipped syllables to keep from screaming at her. I took a deep breath. “Look, I have one lead left. As soon as I get up there, I’ll be happy to check it out, but if this is sheriff’s department business, then it’s out of my hands.”There was one of those silences that sounded like it contained an exclamation point. “If you don’t want to finish the job, why don’t you come right out and say so?”“I’m not saying that.”“Then when are you coming back?”“I’m not sure yet. Next week. Maybe Tuesday.”“Next week?” she said. “What’s wrong with today? If you got in your car now, you could be here in six hours.”“What’s the big hurry? This has been going on for weeks.”“Well, for one thing, you still owe me five hundred dollars’ worth of work. For that kind of money, I would think you’d want to get here as soon as possible.”“Selma, I’m not going to sit here and argue about this. I’ll do what I can.”“Wonderful. What time shall I expect you?”“I have no idea.”“Surely, you can give me some idea when you might arrive. I have other obligations. I’ll be gone all day tomorrow. I go to ten o’clock service and then spend some time with my cousin down in Big Pine. I can’t sit around waiting for you to show up any time it suits. Besides, if you’re coming, I’ll need to make arrangements.”“I’ll call when I get there, but I’m not going to stay at the Nota Lake Cabins. I hate that place and I won’t be put in that position. It’s too remote and it’s dangerous.”“Fine,” she said, promptly. “You can stay here at the house with me.”“I wouldn’t dream of imposing. I’ll find another motel so there won’t be any inconvenience for either one of us.”“It’s no inconvenience. I could use the company. Brant thinks it’s high time he moved back to his place. He’s already in the process of packing up. The guest room is always ready. I insist. I’ll have supper waiting and no arguments about that, please.”“We’ll talk about it when I get there,” I said, trying to conceal my irritation. I was rapidly reassessing my opinion of the woman, ready to cast my vote with her legions of detractors. This was a side of her I hadn’t seen before and I was churning with indignation. Of course, I noticed I’d already started revising my mental timetable, preparing to hit the road as soon as possible. Having consented, in effect, I now found myself wanting to get it over with. I shortened the fare-thee-wells, trying to get her off the phone while I could.The minute I replaced the receiver, I picked it up again and placed a call to Colleen Sellers. While the interminable ringing of her line went on, I could feel my impatience mount. “Come on, come on. Be there...”“Hello?”“Colleen, it’s Kinsey here.”“What can I do for you?”She didn’t sound that thrilled to hear from me, but I was through pussy-footing around. “I just spent thirty minutes with Pinkie Ritter’s daughter Dolores and her husband. Turns out Pinkie has another daughter in Nota Lake, which is why he and Alfie went up there in the first place.”“And?”“This is someone I’ve met, a woman named Margaret who works for the sheriff’s department as a clerk. I’m going to have to go back up there and talk to her again, but I can’t go without knowing what I’m up against.”“Why call me? I can’t help.”“Yes, you can...”“Kinsey, I don’t know anything about this and frankly, I’m annoyed you keep pressing the point.”“Well, frankly, I guess I’ll just have to risk your irritation. What’s the matter with you, Colleen?”“Does it ever occur to you that I might find this painful? I mean, I’m sorry as hell for Selma, but she’s not the only one who’s suffered a loss. I was in love with him, too, and I don’t appreciate your constantly picking at the wound.”“Oh, really. Well, it’s interesting that you should say so because you want to know what I think is going on? I think it pisses you off that you never had any power or any control in that relationship. Tom may have taken the moral high ground, acting from his lofty-sounding principles, but the fact is he left you with nothing and this is your payback.”“That’s not true.”“Try again,” I said.“What’s to pay back? He never did anything to me.”“Tom was a tease. He was willing to flirt, but he was quick to draw lines you couldn’t cross. He could afford to enjoy your attention because it didn’t cost him a thing. He accepted the tribute without taking any risks, which meant he got to feel virtuous while you were left like a kid with your nose pressed to the glass. You could see what you wanted, but you weren’t allowed to touch. And now you’re thinking that’s the best you’ll ever have, which is really bullshit because you didn’t have anything. All this talk about pain is an attempt to sanctify a big, fat, emotional zero.” I knew I was only ragging on her because Selma had ragged on me, but it felt good nonetheless. Later, I’d feel guilty for being such a bitch, but for now it seemed like the only way to get what I wanted.She was silent for a moment. I could hear the intake of cigarette smoke, followed by the exhale of her breath. “Maybe.”“Maybe, my ass. It’s the truth,” I said. “Everybody sees him as noble, but I think he was supremely egotistical. How honorable was he when he never had the courage to tell his wife?”“Tell her what?”“That he was tempted to be unfaithful because of his attraction to you. He didn’t act on his feelings, but it’s no bloody wonder she ended up feeling insecure. And what did it net you? You’re still hung up on him and you may never get yourself off the hook.”“Look, you really don’t know what you’re talking about so let’s skip all the homegrown psychology: Tell me what you want and get it over with.”“You have to level with me.”“Why?”“Because my life may depend on it,” I snapped. “Come on, Colleen. You’re a professional. You know better. You sit there doling out little tidbits of information, hanging on to the crumbs because it’s all you have. This is serious damn shit. If Tom were in your position, do you think he’d withhold information in a situation like this?”She inhaled again. “Probably not.” Grudgingly.“Then let’s get on with it. If you know what’s going on, for god’s sake, let’s have it.”She seemed to hesitate. “Tom was facing a moral crisis. I was the easy part, but I wasn’t all of it.”“What do you mean, you were the easy part?”“I’m not sure how to explain. I think he could do the right thing with me and it was a comfort to him. That situation made sense while the other problem he was facing was more complicated.”“You’re just guessing at this or do you know for a fact?”“Well, Tom never came out and said so, but he did allude to the issue. Something about not knowing how to reconcile his head and his gut.”“In regard to what?”“He felt responsible for Toth’s murder.”“He felt responsible? How come?”“A breach of confidentiality.”“As in what? I don’t get it.”“Toth’s whereabouts,” she said. “I gave him the address and phone number of the Gramercy. Tom thought someone used the information to track Toth down and kill him. It was driving him crazy to think the man might have died because of his carelessness.”I felt myself blinking at the phone, trying to make sense of what she’d said. “But Selma tells me Tom was always tight-lipped. That was one of her complaints. He never talked about anything, especially when it came to his work.”“It wasn’t talk at all. He thought someone took an unauthorized look at his notes.”“But his notebook is missing.”“Well, it wasn’t back then.”“Who did he suspect? Did he ever mention a name?” “Someone he worked with. And that’s my guess, by the way, not something he said to me directly. Why else would it bother him if it wasn’t someone betraying the department?”I felt myself grow still. I flashed on the officers I’d met in Nota Lake: Rafer LaMott; Tom’s brother Macon; Hatch Brine; James Tennyson; Earlene’s husband, Wayne. Even Deputy Carey Badger who’d taken my report on the night of the assault. The list seemed to go on and on and all of them were connected with the Nota Lake Sheriff’s Department or the CHP. At the back of my mind, I’d been flirting with a possibility I’d scarcely dared to admit. What I’d been harboring was the suspicion that my attacker had been trained at a police academy. I’d been resisting the notion, but I could feel it begin to take root in my imagination. He’d taken me down with an efficiency I’d been taught once upon a time myself. Whether he was currently employed in some branch of law enforcement, I couldn’t be sure, but the very idea left me feeling cold. “Are you telling me one of Tom’s colleagues was involved in a double homicide?”“I think that was his suspicion and it was tearing him apart. Again, this wasn’t something he said. This is my best guess.”This time I was silent for a moment. “I should have seen that. How stupid of me. Shit.”“What will you do now?”“Beats the hell out of me. What would you suggest?”“Why not talk to someone in Internal Affairs?”“And say what? I’m certainly willing to give them anything I have, but at this point, it’s all speculation, isn’t it?”“Well, yes. I guess that’s one reason I didn’t call myself. I’ve got nothing concrete. Maybe if you talk to Pinkie’s daughter up there, it will clarify the situation.”“Meanwhile alerting the guy that I’m breathing down his neck,” I said.“But you can’t do this on your own.”“Who’m I gonna call? The Nota Lake Sheriff’s Department?”“I’m not sure I’d do that,” she said, laughing for once.“Yeah, well if I figure it out, I’ll let you know,” I said. “Any other comments or advice while we’re on the subject?”She thought about it briefly. “Well, one thing... though you may have already thought about this. It must have been general knowledge Tom was working on this case, so once he dropped dead, the guy must have thought he was home free.”“And now I come along. Bad break,” I said. “Of course, the guy can’t be sure how much information Tom passed to his superiors.”“Exactly. If it’s not in his reports, it might still be in circulation somewhere, especially with his notes gone. You’d better hope you get to ’em before someone else does.”“Maybe the guy already has them in his possession.”“Then why’s he afraid of you? You’re only dangerous if you have the notes,” she said.I thought about the search of Tom’s den. “You’re right.”“I’d proceed with care.”“Trust me,” I said. “One more question while I have you on the line. Were you ever in Nota Lake yourself?”“Are you kidding? Tom was too nervous to see me there.”I replaced the receiver, distracted. My anxiety level was rising ominously, like a toilet on the verge of overflowing. The fear was like something damp and heavy sinking into my bones. I have a thing about authority figures, specifically police officers in uniform, probably dating from that first encounter while I was trapped in the wreckage of my parents’ VW at the age of five. I can still remember the horror and the relief of being rescued by those big guys with their guns and nightsticks. Still, the sense of jeopardy and pain also attached to that image. At five, I wasn’t capable of separating the two. In terms of confusion and loss, what I’d experienced was irrevocably bound up with the sight of men in uniform. As a child, I’d been taught the police were my pals, people to turn to if you were lost or afraid. At the same time, I knew police had the power to put you in jail, which made them fearful to contemplate if you were sometimes as “bad” as I was. In retrospect, I can see that I’d applied to the police academy, in part, to ally myself with the very folks I feared. Being on the side of the law was, no doubt, my attempt to cope with that old anxiety. Most of the officers I’d known since had been decent, caring people, which made it all the more alarming to think that one might have crossed the line. I couldn’t think when anything had frightened me quite as much as the idea of going up against this guy, but what could I do? If I quit this one, then what? The next time I got scared, was I going to quit that job, too?I went up the spiral stairs and dutifully started shoving items in my duffel.
