---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_022.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["number", "said", "back", "tom", "could", "door", "would", "note", "key", "desk", "went", "head", "barrett", "like", "window", "year", "one", "february", "got", "month", "fell", "page", "day", "name", "two"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit022html

---


Unknown
TWENTY-ONECecilia was late getting back. Instead of returning at 11:30, it was closer to 12:15 when she finally walked in the door. She was dressed for church in a baggy blue tweed suit with bumble bee scatter pins on the lapel. The white blouse underneath featured a frothy burst of lace at the neck. She expressed no surprise when she saw me and in my paranoid state, I imagined my presence had been reported in advance. She opened the half-door to the office, closed it behind her, put her handbag on the desk, and turned to look at me. “Now. What can I do for you? I hear you’re staying at Selma’s so it can’t be a room you’ve come to ask about.”“I’m still working on this business of Tom’s death.”“Seven weeks ago tomorrow. Hard to take it in,” she said.“Do you happen to remember who was staying here that weekend?”“At the motel? That’s easy.” She reached for the registration ledger, licked her index finger, and began to page back through the weeks. March became February as she reversed the days. The week of February 1 appeared. She ran a finger down the list of names. “A party of skiers, maybe six of ’em in two cabins. I gave ’em Hemlock and Spruce, as far away from the office as I could make it because I knew they’d get to partying. That type always do. I remember them toting in more cases of beer than they had luggage. Complained a lot, too. Water pressure, heat. Nothing suited them,” she said, shooting me a look.“Anyone else? Any single women?”“Meaning what?”“Not meaning anything, Cecilia,” I said, patiently. “I’m following up on the CHP report. Tennyson says he saw a woman walking down the road. She may have been a figment of his imagination. It’s possible she had nothing to do with Tom. It would be helpful to find her so I’m hoping against hope she was staying here that night. That way you could tell me how to get in touch with her.”She checked the register again. “Nope. Married couple from Los Angeles. Or so they claimed. Only saw that pair when they crawled out of bed to take meals. And one other family with a couple of kids. Wife was in a wheelchair so I doubt he saw her.”“What about you? When you came back from the movies, was there anyone on the road? This would have been between ten and ten-thirty.”Cecilia seemed to give it some thought and then shook her head. “The only thing I remember is someone using the phone out there. I try to discourage strangers stopping off to make calls; tromping up and down the porch stairs, ripping pages from the telephone book. Handset’s been stolen twice. This is private property.”“I thought the pay phone was public.”“Not as far as I’m concerned. That’s strictly for motel customers. One of the amenities,” she said. “Anyway, I could see the Rainbow was closed and the outside lights were off. I poked my head out, but it was only Barrett calling her dad to pick her up. I offered her a lift, but she said he was already on his way.”“You have any idea if Rafer had picked up on the 9-1-1 dispatch?”“You mean, the ambulance for Tom? Probably,” she said. “Or James might have called him, knowing they were such good friends.” She closed the ledger. “Now, I hope you’ll excuse me. I have someone joining me for Sunday lunch.”“Sure. No problem. I appreciate your help.”I tucked my papers in the briefcase, gathered up the index cards, put a rubber band around them, and dropped them in there, too. I shrugged into my jacket, grabbed my handbag and the briefcase, and returned to my car at the Rainbow. So here’s the question I asked myself: If Barrett left work at nine thirty, why did it take her thirty to forty minutes to call her dad? I sat in the car, watching the clouds gather in a dark gray sky, watching the light dim down to a twilight state. It was only one o’clock in the afternoon, but the dark was so pervasive that the photo sensor on Cecilia’s exterior lights popped to life. Snow began to fall, big airy flakes settling on the windshield like a layer of soap suds. I waited, watching the rear of the Rainbow Cafe.By two-thirty, the lunch crowd was all but gone. I sat with the inborn patience of the cat watching for a lizard to reappear from the crevice between two rocks. At 2:44, the back door opened and Barrett came out, wearing her apron and her chef’s toque and carrying a large plastic garbage bag intended for the trash bin to my left. I rolled down the window. “Hi, Barrett. You have a minute?”She dumped the garbage bag and moved closer. I leaned over and unlocked the passenger door, pushing it open a crack. “Hop in. You’ll freeze to death out there.”She made no move. “I thought you were gone.”“I was visiting Cecilia. What time do you get off work?”“Not for hours.”“Why don’t you take a break? I’d like to talk to you.”She hesitated, looking toward the Rainbow. “I’m really not supposed to, but it’s okay for just a minute.” She got in the car, slammed the door, and crossed her bare arms against the cold. I’d have run the engine for the heat, but I didn’t want to waste the gas and I was hoping her discomfort would motivate her to tell me what I wanted to know.“Your dad says you’re on your way to med school.”“I haven’t been accepted yet,” she said.“Where’re you thinking to go?”“Did you want something in particular? Because Nancy doesn’t know I’m out here and I really don’t have a coffee break until closer to three.”“I should get to the point, now you mention it,” I said. I could feel a fib start to form. For me, it’s the same sensation as a sneeze in the making, that wonderful reaction of the autonomic nervous system when something tickles my nose. “I was curious about some-thing.” Please note, she didn’t ask what. “Wasn’t it you Tom Newquist was here to meet that night?”“Why would he do that?”“I have no idea. That’s why I’m asking you,” I said.She must have done some acting at one point; maybe high school, the senior play, not the lead. She made a show of frowning, then shook her head in bafflement. “I don’t think so,” she said, as though racking her brain.“I have to tell you, he made a note on his desk calendar. He wrote Barrett plain as day.”“He did?”“I ran across it today, which is why I was asking earlier who he was here to meet. I was hoping you’d be honest, but you dropped the ball,” I said. “I would have let it pass, but then the story was confirmed, so here I am. You want to tell me how it went?”“Confirmed?”“As in verified,” I said.“Who confirmed it?”“Cecilia.”“It wasn’t anything,” she said.“Well, great. Cough it up, in that case. I’d like to hear.”“We just talked a few minutes and then he started feeling bad.”“What’d you talk about?”“Just stuff. We were chatting about my dad. I mean, it was nothing in particular. Just idle conversation. Me and Brant used to go steady and he was asking about the breakup. He always felt bad that we didn’t hang in together. I knew he was leading up to something, but I didn’t know what. Then, he started feeling sick. I could see the color drain from his face and he started sweating. I was scared.”“Did he say he was in pain?”She nodded, her voice wavering when she spoke. “He was clutching his chest and his breathing was all raspy. I said I’d go back to the motel and get some help and he said, fine, do that. He told me to lock the truck door and not mention our meeting to anyone. He was real emphatic about that, made me promise. Otherwise, I might have told you when you asked the first time.” She fumbled in her uniform pocket and found a tissue. She swiped at her eyes and blew her nose.I waited until she was calmer before I went on. “Did he say anything else?”She took a deep breath. “Stay off the road if any cars came along. He didn’t want anyone to know I’d been talking to him.”“Why?”“He didn’t want to put me in any danger, was what he said.”“He didn’t say from whom?”“He didn’t mention anyone by name,” she said.“What else?”“That’s everything.”“He didn’t give you his notebook for safekeeping?”She shook her head mutely.“Are you sure?”“Positive.”“I thought he gave you the little black book where he kept his field notes.”“Well, he didn’t.”“Barrett, tell the truth. Please, please, please? Pretty please with sugar on it? Trust me, I won’t say a word to anyone about your having it.”“I’m telling you the truth.”I shook my head. “I hate to contradict you, but Tom always kept it with him and yet nobody’s seen it since he died.”“So?”“So everybody’s been assuming he was by himself that night. Now it turns out you were in his truck.Where else could it be? He was anxious to protect the notebook so he must have given it to you. That’s the only way it adds up. If you can think of another explanation, I’d love to hear it.”The silence was exquisite. I let it drag on a bit without breathing another word.“I went for help.”“I’m sure you did,” I said. “The CHP officer saw you on the road. What about the notebook?”Barrett looked out the window. “You don’t have any proof,” she said, faintly.“Well, yeah, I know. I mean, except for the fact that Cecilia saw you on the motel porch that night,” I said. “She says your dad came and picked you up, which is what you said yourself. You just fudged a tiny bit about the sequence of events. I can’t prove you have the notebook, but it stands to reason.”Nancy poked her head out of the Rainbow’s back door. Barrett opened the door and leaned out, calling, “I’ll be right there!” Nancy nodded and waved.“So where’s the notebook?”“In my purse,” she said, glumly.“Could you give it to me?”“What’s so important about the notes?”“He was investigating two murders so I’m assuming his notes are somehow relevant. Did you read them yourself?”“Well, yeah, but it’s just a bunch of interviews and stuff. Lots of dates and abbreviations. It’s no big deal.”“Then why does it matter if you pass it on to me?”“He told me to hide it ‘til he could decide what to do with it.”“He didn’t know he would die.”“What a bummer,” she said.“Look, if you’ll give it to me now, I’ll make a copy first thing tomorrow and give it back to you.”After an agonizing moment, she said, “All right.”She got out of the car on her side and I got out on mine, locking the doors quickly before I followed her in. She kept her handbag in the storage room to the left of the kitchen door. Barrett took the notebook out of her bag and passed it to me. She seemed irritated that I’d managed to outmaneuver her somehow. “The other thing he said was the key’s on his desk,” she said.“The key’s in his desk?”“That’s what he told me. He said it twice.”“In or on?”“On, I think. I have to go.”“Thanks. You’re a doll.” I put my finger to my lips. “Top secret. Not a word to anyone.”“Shit. Then why did I tell you?”Nancy stuck her head in the kitchen door. “Oh, Kinsey. You’re here. Brant’s on the phone,” she said.I went out into the cafe proper, which was virtually deserted. The receiver was face down on the counter by the register. “Brant, is that you?”He said, “Hi, Kinsey.”“Where are you? How’d you know I was here?”“I’m at Mom’s. I drove past the Rainbow a while ago and saw your car parked out back. I just wanted to check and make sure you’re okay.”“I’m fine. Is your mother home yet?”“She won’t get back ‘til close to nine,” he said. “You need something?”“Not really. If you have a way to call her, would you let her know I got it?”“Got what?”I curled my fingers around the mouthpiece, feeling like a character in a spy movie. “The notebook.”“How’d you manage that?”“I’ll explain later. I’ll be home in a few minutes. Can you wait?”“Not really. I just stopped by for some stuff I’ll be taking to Sherry’s later.”“You work weekends?”“Not usually,” he said. “I’m filling in for someone and hoping to run some errands first. We’ll talk tomorrow.”“Right. I’ll see you then,” I said.I let myself into Selma’s house and headed out to the kitchen. The house was dim, silent, insufferably warm. Everything was much as I’d left it, except for a plastic wrapped plate of brownies with chocolate frosting sitting on the counter with a note attached: HELP YOURSELF. The condensation on the wrap suggested it had been refrigerated or frozen until recently. Brant must have assumed the note was meant for him because a plate and fork, showing telltale traces of chocolate, were sitting on the table at the place he occupied. I was sorry I’d missed him. We could have put our heads together.I went into Tom’s study and sat down in his swivel chair. I turned on his desk light and started going through the notebook. The cover was a pebbly black leather, soft with wear, the corners bent. I took the obvious route, starting at the first page-dated June 1-and working through to the last, which was dated February 1, two days before he died. Here, at last, were the ten months’ worth of missing notes. The scribbles, on thin-lined paper, covered all the miscellaneous cases he’d been working on during that period. Each was identified by a case number in the margin to the left, and included complaints, crime-scene investigations, names, addresses, and phone numbers of witnesses. In a series of nearly indecipherable abbreviations, I could trace the course of successive interviews on any given matter; Tom’s notes to himself, his case references, the comments and questions that cropped up as he proceeded. There, in something close to hieroglyphics, I read about the discovery of Pinkie’s body, the findings of the coroner, Trey Kirchner... whom Tom referred to as III. Any recurring name Tom generally reduced to its first letter. I found references to R and B, which I assumed were Rafer and Tom’s boss, Sheriff Bob Staffer. By copious squints and leaps of imagination, I could see that he’d worked backward from Pinkie’s death to his incarceration in Chino and his friendship with Alfie Toth, a fact confirmed by MB, Margaret Brine at NLSD, Nota Lake Sheriff’s Department. CS I took to refer to Colleen Sellers, sometimes referred to as C, who’d called to report Alfie Toth’s jail time in ST. I found the summary of his trip to Santa Teresa in June, including dates, times, mileage, and expenditures for food and lodging. As I’d learned earlier, he’d talked to Dave Estes at the Gramercy on 6-5. Later, he’d talked to Olga Toth, her address and phone number neatly noted. By the time CS called again to report the discovery of Toth’s remains, Tom’s notes had become cursory. Where previously he’d been meticulous about detailing the contents of conversations, he was suddenly circumspect, reverting I suspected to a code of some kind. The last page of notes contained only some numbers-8, 12, 1, 11, and 26 writ large, and underlined with an exclamation point and question mark. Even the punctuation suggested a disbelief most emphatic. I sat and stared at the numbers until they danced on the page.I got up and went to the kitchen, where I paced the floor. I poured myself some water from the tap and I drank it, making the most satisfactory gulping sounds. I put the glass in the dishwasher and then in a fit of tidiness, added Brant’s fork and his plate. I let my brain off the hook, tending to idle occupations while I picked at the riddle. What the hell did the numbers 8, 12, 1, 11, and 26 signify? A date? The combination to a safe? I thought about Tom’s telling Barrett about the “key” in or on his desk. I’d been working at his desk for a week and hadn’t seen any key that I remembered. What kind of key? The key to what? It’s not as though his notebook had a tiny lock like a teenager’s diary.I went back to the den and sat down at his desk, immediately searching through his drawers again. Maybe he had a lock box. Maybe he had a home safe. Maybe he had a storage cupboard secured by a small combination lock. How many bags full of garbage had I thrown out this past week? How could I be sure I hadn’t tossed the key he was referring to? I felt a wave of panic at the idea that I’d thrown out something crucial to his purposes and critical to mine.One by one, I emptied the contents of each drawer, then removed the drawer itself, checking the back panel and the bottom. I got down on my hands and knees and peered at the underside of the desk, feeling along the sides in case a key had been taped in place. In the drawer with his handcuffs and nightstick, I came across his flashlight and used that as I felt along the drawer rails, tilted his swivel chair back to check the underside of the seat. Did he mean the key, as “a thing that explains or solves something else,” or a literal key, as an instrument or device to open a lock? I put the drawers back together and moved everything off the top. I ran a finger across his blotter, looking for a repetition of the numbers among the notes he’d scribbled. The numbers were there 8, 12, 1, 11, 26-appearing in the center of a noose. They were written twice more, once with a pen line encircling it and once in a box with a shaded border done in pencil. What if I’d discarded the critical information? Had the trash been picked up? I was working hard to suppress the nagging worry I felt. I was in a white-hot sweat. The house, as usual, felt like an oven. I crossed to the window and lifted the sash. I loosened the catches on the storm window and pushed the glass out unceremoniously, watching with satisfaction as the window dropped to the ground below. I swallowed mouthfuls of fresh air, hoping to quell my anxiety.I sat down at the desk again and shook my head. I cleared my mind of emotion, thinking back through the work I’d done earlier in the week. I didn’t remember a key, but if I’d seen one I knew I would never have discarded it. If I hadn’t found the key yet, there was still the chance that I’d uncover it somewhere. So. The point was to keep searching, as calmly and thoroughly as possible. Again, I went through each drawer, looking carefully at the contents. I checked each item in Tom’s file folders, looked in envelopes, opened boxes of paper clips and staples, peered at pens, rulers, labels, tape. Maybe the key was a saying or a phrase that would make everything else clear. At the back of my mind, I kept returning to the notion that the numbers were a code of some kind. I’d never heard any mention of Tom’s having worked in Intelligence so if I was right, the code was probably something simple and easily accessible.On or in his desk.I found a piece of paper and wrote out the alphabet in sequence, attaching the numbers 1 through 26 underneath. If the numbers 8, 12, 1, 11 and 26 were simple letter substitutions, then the name or initials would be HLAKZ. Which meant what? Nothing on the face of it. Something-Los Angeles Something-Something? Didn’t suggest anything to me. I tried the same sequence backward, letting A correspond with the number 26, B correspond with 25, and so forth until I reached the number 1, which I assumed represented Z. If this were the case, then the numbers 8, 12, 1, 11, 26 would spell out SOZPA. Another puzzlement. What the hell was this? A name? My frustration level mounted at a pace with my confusion.8, 12, 1, 11, 26. Months of the year? August, December, January, November? Then what did the 26 denote? And why out of order? Was I supposed to add? Subtract? Sound out the words phonetically like a vanity license plate? I repeated them aloud. “Eight. Twelve. One. Eleven. Twenty-six.” This meant nothing. If the numbers represented letters and this was a word, then all I knew for sure was that the five letters were different... with no repetitions. Someone’s name? I thought about Nota Lake and how many people I’d met here who had five-letter first names. Brant, Macon, Hatch, Wayne. James Tennyson. Rafer. I looked at the exclamation point and the question mark.!? Which said what? Consternation? Dismay?I realized I was famished... a manifestation of my anxiety no doubt. Waiting for Barrett in the cafe parking lot, I’d skipped lunch altogether and this was the price I paid. It was now four-fifteen. I went back to the kitchen in search of sustenance. I was so hungry and so befuddled, my brain cells felt like they’d quit holding hands. I looked in Selma’s refrigerator, greeted by plastic-wrapped leftovers from last night’s dinner. Not memorable to begin with and certainly not worth reheating. I checked the bread drawer. No crackers. I checked the cupboards. No peanut butter. What kind of household did she run? I glanced at her note and in the absence of wholesome foodstuffs, I allowed myself to lift a corner of the plastic wrap and help myself to several brownies. The texture was off-a bit dry for my taste-but the icing was nice and gooey, only a faint. chemical taste suggesting she’d used a boxed mix. Anyone who’d eat Miracle Whip would eat that shit, I thought. This was not Selma’s best effort by a long stretch, but I figured my days consuming her cooking were just about over. I drank some milk from the carton, figuring to save a glass.Thus fortified, I was prepared to tackle the problem. I went back to Tom’s swivel chair and swiveled. What if 8, 12, 1, 11, and 26 were page numbers, referring to the notes themselves? I tried that approach, but the contents of the pages seemed in no way related, sharing no visible common elements and no designated page numbers. The afternoon was stretching toward evening and I was getting nowhere. I went back to the original premise. Selma had hired me to find out why Tom was distressed. I slouched down on my spine and leaned my head on the back of the chair. Why was Tom brooding, Kinsey asked herself? I rocked, allowing myself to ruminate at my leisure. If someone he knew had violated his privacy, reading his notes and using the information to get to Alfie Toth to kill him, that would certainly do the trick. But why would Hatch’s involvement... or James’s or Wayne’s... have generated a moment’s uneasiness or hesitation. Tom played by the rules. I’d been told over and over, he was strictly a law-and-order type. If he’d suspected any one of them, he’d have acted at once. Wouldn’t he? Why would he not? It wouldn’t have meant anything to him if Wayne had violated the sanctity of his field notes. My gaze dropped to the blotter. I pushed a stack of files aside. Down in the right hand corner, Tom had drawn a grid, penning in the days of the month of February, the year unspecified. The First fell on a Sunday, the. Twenty-eighth on a Saturday. The last two Saturdays of the month-the Twenty-first and the Twenty-eighth-were crossed out. Was the year 1908? 1912, 1901, 1911 or 1926? 1 got up and went to the bookshelf, where I took down a copy of his almanac. I thumbed to the index and found the page numbers for a perpetual calendar. In a table to the left the years between 1800 and 2063 were listed in order. Beside each year was a number corresponding to a numbered template, representing all the variations in the way the months could be laid out. Calendar number one was a year in which January 1 fell on a Sunday; February 1 fell on a Wednesday; and each month thereafter was depicted. Calendar number two represented any and all years in which January 1 fell on a Monday; February 1 fell on Thursday; and so forth. If you wanted to know the day of the month for a particular date-say, March 5, 1966-you simply checked the master list for the year 1966, beside which appeared the number seven. Moving to Calendar number seven, you could see that March 5 fell on a Saturday.I flipped on the desk light and studied the series of calendar pages, looking at the Februaries laid out like the one he’d drawn. Calendar number five was like that. February 1 fell on a Sunday and the Twenty-eighth fell on the last Saturday of the month. Calendar number twelve was similar except there were twenty-nine days instead of twenty-eight. I checked the years that corresponded, starting with 1900. 1903 was such a year, but not 1908 and not 1912. In 1914, the First fell on a Sunday and the Twenty-eighth on the last Saturday, but the same wasn’t true of 1926. 1925, 1931, 1942, 1953, 1959, 1970, 1981, 1987, 1998. Why were these particular Februaries important? The year couldn’t be relevant, could it? And why had he crossed out the last two Saturdays of that month? I thought about it for a minute. Eliminating those two Saturdays cut the number of days from twenty-eight to twenty-six-the number of letters in the alphabet. I tried that approach, lining up the letters with the days of the month. The answer was still HLAKZ.Still rocking in his desk chair, I swiveled toward the window. It was nearly five-thirty, fully dark outside. Cold air still spilled through the gap where I’d raised the window. I could almost discern the waves of household heat pouring out in exchange. The room was decidedly chilly. I leaned forward and closed the window, staring at my reflection in the smoke-clouded glass. What the hell did those numbers mean? I could feel a draft from somewhere. Was there a draft coming down the chimney? Curious, I got up and moved out of the den. I walked along the front hall to the living room where I turned on the table lamps. The drapes were wavering as though pushed by an unseen hand. I peered up the chimney and flipped the flue to the shut position. I checked the perimeter doors. The front door was closed and locked, as was the back door, and the door to the garage. That wasn’t it. I poked my head into Selma’s bedroom. All was undisturbed yet the draft was such that the curtains rippled in the windows. I proceeded down the hall. All the windows in Brant’s old bedroom were closed.I stopped where I was. The door to my room was ajar. Had I left it that way? I pushed it open with apprehension. Curtains flapped and fluttered. The room was a shambles. There were jagged shards of glass on the carpet. The window, which I’d oh-so-carefully locked, had been shattered by a hammer that someone had left on the floor. Pebbles of glass the size of rock salt were spread out across the sill like discarded diamonds. The sash had been pushed up, probably from the outside. Someone had clearly entered. I moved to the bed and slid my hand between the box spring and mattress. My gun was missing.
