---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_003.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["one", "selma", "door", "tom", "said", "town", "two", "car", "room", "got", "time", "like", "day", "back", "made", "place", "cabin", "see", "would", "take", "macon", "seemed", "cecilia", "could", "way"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit003html

---


Unknown
TWOToward the end of my visit with her, the Valium seemed to kick in and she rallied. Somehow she managed to pull herself together in a remarkably short period of time. I waited in the living room while she showered and dressed. When she emerged thirty minutes later, she said she was feeling almost like her old self again. I was amazed at the transformation. With her makeup in place, she seemed more confident, though she still tended to speak with a hand lifted to conceal her mouth.For the next twenty minutes, we discussed business, finally reaching an agreement about how to proceed. It was clear by then that Selma Newquist was capable of holding her own. She reached for the phone and in the space of one call not only booked my accommodation but insisted on a ten percent discount on what was already the off-season rate.I left Selma’s at 2:00, stopping off in town long enough to flesh out my standard junk food diet with some Capt’n Jack’s fish and chips and a large Coke. After that, it was time to check into the motel. Obviously, I wouldn’t be leaving Nota Lake for another day yet, at the very least. The motel she’d booked was the Nota Lake Cabins, which consisted of ten rustic cottages set in a wooded area just off the main highway about six miles out of town. Tom’s widowed sister, Cecilia Boden, owned and managed the place. When I pulled into the parking lot, I could see that the area was a bit too remote for my taste. I’m a city girl at heart and generally happiest close to restaurants, banks, liquor stores, and movie theaters, preferably bug free. Since Selma was paying, I didn’t think I should argue the point, and in truth the rough-hewn log exteriors did look more interesting than the motels in town. Silly me.Cecilia was on the telephone when I stepped into the office. I pegged her at sixty, as small and shapeless as a girl of ten. She wore a red plaid flannel shirt tucked into dark stiff blue jeans. She had no butt to speak of, just a flat plain in the rear. I was already wishing she’d quit perming the life out of her short cropped hair. I also wondered what would happen if she allowed the natural gray to emerge from under the uniform brown dye with which she’d doused it.The reception area was compact, a pine-paneled cubbyhole hardly large enough for one small upholstered chair and the rack of pamphlets touting the countless recreational diversions available. A side door marked MANAGER probably led to her private apartment. The reception desk was formed by a twelve-inch writing surface mounted on the lower half of the Dutch door that separated the miniature lobby from the office where I could see the usual equipment: desk, file cabinets, typewriter, cash register, Rolodex, receipt ledger, and the big reservations book she was consulting in response to her caller’s inquiry. She seemed ever so faintly annoyed with the questions she was being asked. “I got rooms on the Twenty-fourth, but nothing the day after... You want fish cleaning and freezing, try the Elms or the Mountain View... Uh-huh... I see... Well, that’s the best I can do...” She smiled to herself, enjoying some kind of private joke “Nope... No room service, no weight room, and the sauna’s broke...”While I waited for her to finish, I pulled out several pamphlets at random, reading about midweek ski lift and lodging packages closer to Mammoth Lakes and Mammoth Summit. I checked the local calendar of events. I’d missed the big annual trout derby, which had taken place the week before. I was also too late to attend February’s big fishing show. Well, dang. I noticed the festivities in April included another fishing show, the trout opener press reception, the official trout opener, and a fish club display, with a Mule Days Celebration and a 30K run coming up in May. It did look like it might be possible to hike, backpack, or mulepack my way into the Eastern Sierras, where I imagined a roving assortment of hungry wildlife lunging and snapping at us as we picked our way down perilously narrow traits with rocks rattling off the mountainside into the yawning abyss.I looked up to find Cecilia Boden staring at me with a flinty expression. “Yes, ma’am,” she said. She kept her hands braced on the Dutch door as if defying me to enter.I told her who I was and she waved aside my offer of a credit card. Mouth pursed, she said, “Selma said to send her the bill direct. I got two cottages available. You can take your pick.” She took a bunch of keys from a hook and opened the lower half of the Dutch door, leaving me to follow as she headed through the front door and down a path packed with cedar chips. The air outside was damp and smelled of loam and pine resin. I could hear the wind moving in the trees and the chattering of squirrels. I left my car where I’d parked it and we proceeded on foot. The narrow lane leading to the cabins was barred by a chain strung between two posts. “I won’t have cars back in this part of the camp. The ground gets too tore up when the weather’s bad,” she said, as if in answer to my question.“Really,” I murmured, for lack of anything better.“We’re close to full up,” she remarked. “Unusual for March.”This was small talk in her book and I made appropriate mouth noises in response. Ahead of us, the cabins were spaced about seventy-five feet apart, separated by bare maples and dogwoods, and sufficient Douglas firs to resemble a cut-your-own Christmas tree farm. “Why do they call it Nota Lake? Is that Indian?”Cecilia shook her head. “Nope. Ancient times, nota was a mark burned into a criminal’s skin to brand him a lawbreaker. That way you always knew who the evildoers were. Bunch of desperadoes ended up over in this area; scoundrels deported to this country from England back in the mid-seventeen hundreds. Some reason all of them were branded; killers and thieves, pickpockets, fornicators-the worst of the worst. Once their indenture’d been served, they became free men and disappeared into the west, landing hereabouts. Their descendants went to work for the railroad, doing manual labor along with assorted coolies and coloreds.Half the people in this town are related to those convicts. Must have been a randy bunch, though where they found women no one seems to know. Ordered ‘ern by mail, if my guess is correct.”We’d reached the first of the cabins and she continued in much the same tone, her delivery flat and without much inflection. “This is Willow. I give ’em names instead of numbers. It’s nicer in my opinion.” She inserted her key. “Each one is different. Up to you.”Willow was spacious, a pine-paneled room maybe twenty feet by twenty with a fireplace made up of big knobby boulders. The inner hearth was black with soot, with wood neatly stacked in the grate. The room was pungent with the scent of countless hardwood fires. Against one wall was a brass bedstead with a mattress shaped like a hillock. The quilt was a crazy patch and looked as if it smelled of mildew. There was a bed table lamp and a digital alarm clock. The rug was an oval of braided rags, bleached of all color, thoroughly flattened by age.Cecilia opened a door on the left. “This here’s the bath and your hanging closet. We got all the amenities. Unless you fish,” she added, in a small aside to herself. “Iron, ironing board, coffeemaker, soap.”“Very nice,” I said.“The other cabin’s Hemlock. Located over near the pine grove by the creek. Got a kitchenette, but no fireplace. I can take you back there if you like.” For the most part, she spoke without making eye contact, addressing remarks to a spot about six feet to my left.“This is fine. I’ll take this one.”“Suit yourself,” she said, handing me a key. “Cars stay in the lot. There’s more wood around the side. Watch for black widder spiders if you fetch more logs. Pay phone outside the office. Saves me the hassle of settling up for calls. We got a cafe down the road about fifty yards in that direction. You can’t miss it. Breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Open six o’clock in the morning until nine-thirty at night.”“Thanks.”After she left, I waited a suitable interval, allowing her time to reach the office ahead of me. I returned to the parking lot and retrieved my duffel, along with the portable typewriter I’d stashed in the rental car. I’d spent my off-hours at Dietz’s catching up on my paperwork. My wardrobe, in the main, consists of blue jeans and turtlenecks, which makes packing a breeze once you toss in the fistful of underpants.In the cabin again, I set the typewriter by the bed and put my few articles of clothing in a crudely made chest of drawers. I unloaded my shampoo and placed my toothbrush and toothpaste on the edge of the sink, looking around me with satisfaction. Home sweet home, barring the black widders. I tried the toilet, which worked, and then inspected the shower, artfully concealed behind a length of white monk’s cloth hanging from a metal rod. The shower pan looked clean, but was constructed of the sort of material that made me want to walk on tiptoe. Outings at the community pool in my youth had taught me to be cautious, bare feet still recoiling instinctively from the clots of soggy tissues and rusted bobby pins. There were none here in evidence, but I sensed the ghostly presence of some old-fashioned crud. I could smell the same chlorine tinged with someone else’s shampoo. I checked the coffeemaker, but the plug seemed to be missing one prong and there were no complimentary packets of coffee grounds, sugar, or non-dairy coffee whitener. So much for the amenities. I was grateful for the soap.I returned to the main room and did a quick survey. Under the side window, a wooden table and two chairs had been arranged with an eye to a view of the woods. I hauled out the typewriter and set it up on the tabletop. I’d have to run into town and find a ream of bond and a copy shop. These days, most P. I. s use computers, but I can’t seem to get the hang of ‘ern. With my sturdy Smith-Corona, I don’t require an electrical outlet and I don’t have to worry about head crashes or lost data. I pulled a chair up to the table and stared out the window at the spindly stand of trees. Even the evergreens had a threadbare look. Through a lacework of pine needles, I could see a line of fencing that separated Cecilia’s property from the one behind. This part of town seemed to be ranchland, mixed with large undeveloped tracts that might have been farmed at one point. I pulled out a tatty legal pad and made myself some notes, mostly doodles if you really want to know.Essentially, Selma Newquist had hired me to reconstruct the last four to six weeks of her late husband’s life on the theory that whatever had troubled him probably took place within that time frame. I don’t generally favor spouses spying on one another-especially when one of the parties is dead-but she seemed convinced the answers would give her closure. I had my doubts.Maybe Tom Newquist was simply worried about finances, or brooding about how to occupy his time during his retirement.I’d agreed to give her a verbal report every two to three days, supplemented by a written account. Selma had demurred at first, saying verbal reports would be perfectly adequate, but I told her I preferred the written, in part to detail whatever information I collected. Productive or not, I wanted her to see what ground I was covering. It was just as important for her to be aware of the information I couldn’t verify as it was for her to have a record of the facts I picked up along the way. With verbal reports, much of the data gets lost in translation. Most people aren’t trained to listen. Given the complexity of our mental processes, the recipient tunes Out, blocks, forgets, or misinterprets eighty percent of what’s been said. Take any fifteen minutes’ worth of conversation and try to reconstruct it later and you’ll see what I mean. If the communication has any emotional content whatever, the quality of the information retained degrades even further. A written report was for my benefit, too. Let a week pass and I can hardly remember the difference between Monday and Tuesday, let alone what stops I made and in what order I made them. I’ve noticed that clients are confident about your abilities until payment comes due and then, suddenly, the total seems outrageous and they stand there wondering exactly what you’ve done to earn it. It’s better to submit an invoice with a chronology attached. I like to cite chapter and verse with all the proper punctuation laid in. If nothing else, it’s a demonstration of both your IQ and your writing skills. How can you trust someone who doesn’t bother to spell correctly and/or can’t manage to lay out a simple declarative sentence?The other issue we’d discussed was the nature of my fees. As a lone operator, I really didn’t have any hard-and-fast rules about billing, particularly in a case like this where I was working out of town. Sometimes I charge a flat fee that includes all my expenses. Some times I charge an hourly rate and add expenses on top of that. Selma had assured me she had money to burn, but frankly, I felt guilty about eating into Tom’s estate. On the other hand, she’d survived him and I thought she had a point. Why should she live the rest of her life wondering if her husband was hiding something from her? Grief is enough of an affront without additional regrets about unfinished business. Selma was already struggling to come to terms with Tom’s death. She needed to know the truth and wanted me to supply it. Fair enough. I hoped I could provide her with an answer that would satisfy.Until I got a sense of how long the job would take, we’d agreed on four hundred bucks a day. From Dietz, I’d borrowed a boilerplate contract. I’d penned in the date and details of what I’d been hired to do and she’d written me a check for fifteen hundred dollars. I’d run that by the bank to make sure it cleared before I got down to business. I’m sorry to confess that while I sympathize with all the widows, orphans, and under-dogs in the world, I think it’s wise to make sure sufficient funds are in place before you rush to some one’s rescue.I closed the cabin and locked it, hiked back to my rental car, and drove the six miles into town. The highway was sparsley strung with assorted businesses: tractor sales, a car lot, trailer park, country store, and a service station. The fields in between were gold with dried grass and tufted with weeds. The wide sweep of sky had turned from strong blue to grey, a thick haze of white obscuring the mountain tops. Away to the west, a torn pattern of clouds lay without motion. All the near hills were a scruffy red brown, polka-dotted with white. Wind rattled in the trees. I adjusted the heater in the car, flipping on the fan until tropical breezes blew against my legs.For my stay in Carson City, I’d packed my tweed blazer for dress up and a blue denim jacket for casual wear. Both were too light and insubstantial for this area. I cruised the streets downtown until I spotted a thrift store. I nosed the rental car into a diagonal parking space out front. The window was crowded with kitchenware and minor items of furniture: a bookcase, a footstool, stacks of mismatched dishes, five lamps, a tricycle, a meat grinder, an old Philco radio, and some red Burma-Shave signs bound together with wire. The top one in the pile read DOES YOUR HUSBAND. What, I thought. Does your husband what? Burma-Shave signs had first appeared in the 1920s and many persisted even into my childhood, always with variations of that tricky, bumping lilt. Does your husband... have a beard?... Is be really very weird?... If he’s living in a cave... Offer him some... Burma-Shave. Or words to that effect.The interior of the store smelled like discarded shoes. I made my way down aisles densely crowded with hanging clothes. I could see rack after rack of items that must have been purchased with an eye to function and festivity. Prom gowns, cocktail dresses, women’s suits, acrylic sweaters, blouses, and Hawaiian shirts. The woolens seemed dispirited and the cottons were tired, the colors subdued from too many rounds in the wash. Toward the rear, there was a rod sagging under the burden of winter jackets and coats.I shrugged into a bulky brown leather bomber jacket. The weight of it felt like one of those lead aprons the technician places across your body while taking dental X-rays from the safety of another room. The jacket lining was fleece, minimally matted, and the pockets sported diagonal zippers, one of which was broken. I checked the inside of the collar. The size was a medium, big enough to accommodate a heavy sweater if I needed one. The price tag was pinned to the brown knit ribbing on the cuff. Forty bucks. What a deal. Does your husband belch and rut? Does be scratch his hairy butt? If you want to see him bathe... tame the beast with Burma-Shave. I tucked the jacket over my arm while I moved up and down the aisles. I found a faded blue flannel shirt and a pair of hiking boots. On my way out, I stopped and untwisted the wire connecting the Burma-Shave signs, reading them one by one.DOES YOUR HUSBANDMISBEHAVE?GRUNT AND GRUMBLERANT AND RAVE?SHOOT THE BRUTE SOMEBURMA-SHAVEI smiled to myself. I wasn’t half-bad at that stuff. I went out to the street again with my purchases in hand. Let’s hear it for the good old days. Lately, Americans have been losing their sense of humor.I spotted an office supply store across the street. I crossed, stocked up on paper supplies, including a couple of packs of blank index cards. Two doors down, I found a branch of Selma’s bank and came out with a wad of twenties in my shoulder bag. I retrieved my car and pulled out, circling the block until I was headed in the right direction. The town already felt familiar, neatly laid out and clean. Main Street was four lanes wide. The buildings on either side were generally one to two stories high, sharing no particular style. The atmosphere was vaguely Western. At each intersection, I caught sight of a wedge of mountains, the snow-capped peaks forming a scrim that ran the length of the town. Traffic was light and I noticed most of the vehicles were practical: pickups and utility vans with ski racks across the tops.When I arrived back at Selma’s, the garage door was open. The parking space on the left was empty. On the right, I spotted a late-model blue pickup truck. As I got out of my car, I noticed a uniformed deputy emerging from a house two doors down. He crossed the two lawns between us, walking in my direction. I waited, assuming this was Tom’s younger brother, Macon. At first glance, I couldn’t tell how much younger he was. I placed him in his late forties, but his age might have been deceptive. He had dark hair, dark brows, and a pleasant, unremarkable face. He was close to six feet tall, compactly built. He wore a heavy jacket, cropped at the waist to allow ready access to the heavy leather holster on his right hip. The wide belt and the weapon gave him a look of heft and bulk that I’m not sure would have been evident if he’d been stripped of his gear.“Are you Macon?” I asked.He offered me his hand and we shook. “That’s right. I saw you pull up and thought I’d come on over and introduce myself. You met my wife, Phyllis, a little earlier.”“I’m sorry about your brother.”“Thank you. It’s been a rough one, I can tell you,” he said. He hooked a thumb toward the house. “Selma’s not home. I believe she went off to the market a little while ago. You need in? Door’s open most times, but you’re welcome to come to our place. It sure beats setting out in the cold.”“I should be fine. I expect she’ll be home in a bit and if not, I can find ways to amuse myself. I would like to talk to you sometime in the next day or two.”“Absolutely. No problem. I’ll tell you anything you want, though I admit we’re baffled as to Selma’s purpose. What in the world is she worried about? Phyllis and I can’t understand what she wants with a private detective, of all things. With all due respect, it seems ridiculous.”“Maybe you should talk to her about that,” I said.“I can tell you right now what you’re going to learn about Tom. He’s as decent a fellow as you’d ever hope to meet. Everybody in town looked up to him, including me.,,“This may turn out to be a short stay, in that case.”“Where’d Selma put you? Some place nice, I hope.”“Nota Lake Cabins. Cecilia Boden’s your sister, as I understand it. You have other siblings?”Macon shook his head. “Just three of us,” he said. “I’m the baby in the family. Tom’s three years older than Cecilia and close to fifteen years my senior. I’ve been trailing after them two ever since I can remember. I ended up in the sheriff’s department years after Tom hired on. Like that in school, too. Always following in somebody else’s footsteps.” His eyes strayed to the street as Selma’s car approached and slowed, pulling into the driveway. “Here she is now so I’ll leave you two be. You let me know what I can do to help. You can give us a call or come knocking on our door. It’s that green house with white trim.”Selma had pulled into the garage by then. She got out, of the car. She and Macon greeted each other with an almost imperceptible coolness. While she opened the trunk of her sedan, Macon and I parted company, exchanging the kind of chitchat that signals the end of a conversation. Selma lifted out a brown paper sack of groceries and two cleaner’s bags, and slammed the trunk lid down. Under her fur coat, she wore smartly pressed charcoal slacks and a long-sleeved shirt of cherry-colored silk.As Macon walked back to his house, I moved into the garage. “Let me give you a hand with that,” I said, reaching for the bag of groceries, which she relinquished to me.“I hope you haven’t been out here long,” she said. “I decided I’d spent enough time feeling sorry for myself. Best to keep busy.”“Whose pickup truck? Was that Tom’s?” I asked.Selma nodded as she unlocked the door leading from the garage into the house. “I had a fellow from the garage tow it the day after he died. The officer who found him took the keys out and left it locked up where it was. I can’t bring myself to drive it. I guess eventually I’ll sell it or pass it along to Brant.” She pressed a button and the garage door descended with a rumble.“You met Macon, I see.”“He came over to introduce himself,” I said as I followed her into the house. “One thing I ought to mention. I’m going to be talking to a lot of people around town and I really don’t know yet what approach I’ll take. Whatever you hear, just go along with it.”She put her keys back in her purse, moving into the utility room with me close behind. She closed the door after us. “Why not tell the truth?”“I will where I can, but I gather Tom was a highly respected member of the community. If I start asking about his personal business, nobody’s going to say a word. I may try another tack. It won’t be far off, but I may bend the facts a bit.”“What about Cecilia? What will you say to her?”“I don’t know yet. I’ll think of something.”“She’ll fill your ear. She’s never really liked me. Whatever Tom’s problems, she’ll blame me if she can. Same with his brother. Macon was always coming after Tom for something-a loan, advice, good word in the department, you name it. If I hadn’t stepped in, he’d have sucked Tom dry. You can do me a favor: Take anything they say with a grain of salt.”The disgruntled are good. They’ll tell you anything, I thought.Once in the kitchen, Selma hung her fur coat on the back of a chair. I watched while she unloaded the groceries and put items away. I would have helped, but she waved aside the offer, saying it was quicker if she did it herself. The kitchen walls were painted bright yellow, the floor a spatter of seamless white-and-yellow linoleum. A chrome-and-yellow-plastic upholstered dinette set filled an alcove with a bump-out window crowded with... I peered closer... artificial plants. She indicated a seat across the table from hers as she folded the bag neatly and put it in a rack bulging with other grocery bags.She moved to the refrigerator and opened the door. “What do you take in your coffee? I’ve got hazelnut coffee creamer or a little half-and-half.” She took out a small carton and gave the pouring spout an experimental mental sniff. She made a face to herself and set the carton in the sink.“Black’s fine.”“You sure?”“Really. It’s no problem. I’m not particular,” I said. I took off my jacket and hung it on the back of my chair while Selma rounded up two coffee mugs, the sugar bowl, and a spoon for herself.She poured coffee and replaced the glass carafe on the heating element of the coffee machine, heels tap-tap-tapping on the floor as she crossed and recrossed the room. Her energy was ever so faintly tinged with nervousness. She sat down again and immediately flicked a small gold Dunhill to light a fresh cigarette. She inhaled deeply. “Where will you begin?”“I thought I’d start in Tom’s den. Maybe the answer’s easy, sitting right up on the surface.”
