---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_012.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["said", "see", "hand", "rafer", "know", "could", "like", "tom", "get", "think", "one", "table", "place", "back", "might", "car", "cabin", "look", "got", "two", "case", "made", "work", "missing", "well"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit012html

---


Unknown
ELEVENIt was six A.M. by the time Rafer finally put me in the front seat of his car. The offer of a ride was as close to an apology as I was likely to get. No doubt his true motivation was to quiz me about the current state of my investigation, but I really didn’t care. The sun was not officially up and the early morning air was curiously gloomy. I was at a loss where to have him deliver me. I couldn’t bear the idea of being in the cabin by myself. I didn’t think Selma would be up at this hour and I couldn’t believe Cecilia would welcome my further company. As if reading my mind, Rafer said, “Where to?”“I guess you better drop me at the Rainbow. I can hang out there until I figure out what to do next.”“I’d like to check the cabin. I’ve got a print tech from Independence coming up at seven, as soon as he gets in. Maybe we’ll get lucky and find out your intruder left his prints.”“Perform an exorcism while you’re at it. I don’t expect a good night’s sleep until I’m out of there.”He glanced over at me. “You thinking about going home?”“I’ve been thinking about that ever since I arrived.” He was silent for a while, turning his attention to the road. The town was beginning to come to life. Cars passed us, headlights almost unnecessary as the sky began to alter in gradients from steel gray to dove. At one of the intersections, a restaurant called Elmo’s was ablaze with light, patrons visible through the windows. I could see heads bent over breakfast plates. A waitress moved from table to table with a coffeepot in each hand, offering refills. Out on the sidewalk, two women in sweatsuits were absorbed in conversation as they jogged. They arrived at the corner as the light turned red and began to run in place. We moved forward again.Rafer finally spoke up. “Last time I had anything to do with a PI. guy claimed to be working a missing persons case. I went to quite a bit of trouble to follow up, taking two days of my time to track his fellow down in another state. Turns out the P. I. lied to me. He was trying to collect on a bad debt. I was pissed.”“I don’t blame you,” I said. I began to rack my brain, trying to remember if I’d lied to him myself.“You have a theory about last night’s attack?”“I’m assuming this was the same guy who followed me from Tiny’s,” I said.His gaze returned to the road. “I heard about that. Corbet made sure we got a copy of the report. I passed it on to the CHP so they could keep an eye out as well. Anything missing?”“I didn’t even bother to look. I was too busy taking care of this,” I said, lifting my hand. “Anyway, I doubt the motive was theft. I think the point was to discourage my investigation.”“Why?”“You tell me. I guess he feels protective of Tom Newquist. That’s the best I can do.”“I’m not convinced this has anything to do with Tom.”“And I can’t prove it does so where does that leave us?”“You could be mistaken, you know. You’re single and you’re attractive. That makes you a natural target-”“For what? This wasn’t sexually motivated. It was plain old assault and battery. The guy wanted to cause me great bodily harm.”“What else?”“What else, what? There’s nothing else,” I said. “Here’s a question for you: Where’s Tom’s notebook? It’s missing. No one’s seen it since he died.”He shot me a look and then shook his head blankly. I could see him casting back in his mind. “I’m trying to remember when I last saw it. He usually kept it somewhere close, but I know it’s not in his desk drawers because we cleaned those out.”“The CHP officer doesn’t remember seeing it in the truck. It didn’t occur to him to look for it, but it does seem odd. I know it must irritate you that I’m pursuing the point-”“Look. I was out of line on that. I get huffy about Selma. It has nothing to do with you.”I could feel the distance between us easing. There’s nothing as disarming as a concession of that sort. “It may not be relevant in any event,” I said. “What’s the procedure on reports? Wouldn’t most of his notes have already been written up and submitted?”“Possibly. He kept his own copies of every report in the particular file he was working. The originals are sent to the records section down in Independence. Reports are submitted at regular intervals. Newer officers seem to be better organized about this stuff. Old timers like me and Tom tend to do things when we get around to it.”“Would there be any way to work backward by checking to see what reports were missing?”“I don’t know how you’d do that and it wouldn’t tell you much. You’d have no way of knowing where he’d been and who he’d talked to, let alone the content of conversations. It’s not uncommon to have a file with a couple of reports missing... especially if he was working a case and hadn’t typed up his notes yet. Besides, all notes wouldn’t be incorporated, just the information he judged relevant. You might scribble down a lot of stuff that wouldn’t amount to a hill of beans when you get right down to it.”“Suppose he was developing information on a case of his?”“He probably was. It also might have been a case someone else had worked that he was reworking for some reason.”“Such as?”Rafer shrugged. “He might have picked up a new lead. Occasionally, there’s a case in the works where the information is sensitive... might be an informant in another state, or something to do with Internal Affairs.”“My point exactly. I mean, what if Tom was privy to something he didn’t know how to handle.”“He’d have told me. We talked about everything.”“Suppose it concerned you?”He made a little move that indicated agitation. “Let’s get off this, okay? I’m not saying we can’t talk about this further, but let me think about it some.”“One more thing. And don’t get all testy on me. Just tell me what you think. Is there any possibility Tom might have been involved with another woman?”“No.”I laughed. “Try to keep your answer to twenty-five words or less,” I said. “Why not?”“He was a deeply moral man.”“Well, couldn’t that explain his brooding? A man with no conscience wouldn’t be at war with himself.”“Objection, your honor. Purely speculative.”“But Rafer, something was troubling him. Selma’s not the only one who saw that. I don’t know if it was personal or professional, but from what I gather, he was truly distressed.”We pulled into the parking area between the Rainbow Cafe and the Nota Lake Cabins. Rafer put the car in park and then opened his door. “Come on. I’ll buy you breakfast. I got a daughter works here.”I struggled with the handle and then gave up. I sat while he walked around the car and opened the door on my side. He even offered a helping hand as I emerged. “Thanks. I can see this is going to be a pain.”“It’ll be good for you,” he said. “Force you to deal with your dependency issues.”“I don’t have dependency issues,” I said stoutly.He smiled in response.He held the cafe door open and I entered ahead of him. The place was bustling, all men, clearly the stopping-off place of early risers, ranchers, cops, and laborers on their way to work. The interior was, as usual, overheated, and smelled of coffee, bacon, sausages, maple syrup, and cigarettes. The brown-haired waitress, Nancy, was taking an order from a table full of fellows in overalls while Barrett, behind the counter, was focused on a griddle spread with pancakes and omelettes in the making. Rafer took the lead and found us an empty booth. As we passed the intervening tables, I could see we were attracting any number of stares. I was guessing the jungle drums had already spread the news about my assailant.“How’d you end up in Nota Lake?” I asked, as we slid into the seats.“I started out as a dispatcher for the L. A. PD., working on my degree at night. Once I graduated, I applied to the academy. I was hired on at San Bernardino, eventually assigned to robbery detail, but when Barrett was born, Vicky started bugging me to leave LA. She was working as an ER nurse at Queen of Angels, and hated the commute. Even on two salaries, we couldn’t afford to buy a house in any of the areas we liked. I heard about an opening in the sheriff’s department up here. Vick and. I drove up one weekend and fell in love with the place. That’s been twenty-three years. Tom was already here. He grew up in Bakersfield.”Two tables over, I caught sight of Macon with his gaze fixed on me. He leaned forward, making some comment. The man with him. made one of those casual turns, pretending to glance idly around the room when he was really taking aim at me. I picked up a menu, pretending I didn’t notice him pretending not to notice me. Margaret’s husband, Hatch.“You know what you want?” Rafer asked. “I do the works myself. I keep trying to reform, but I can’t resist.”“I’m with you,” I said. “Your daughter’s name is Barrett?”“That was Vick’s idea. I’m not sure where she got it, but it seems to fit. The job is temporary, by the way. She’s applied to med school. She wants to be a shrink. This allows her to live at home and save her money ‘til she goes.”“Where’d she do her undergraduate work? U. C. L. A.“Where else?” he said, smiling. “What about you?”“I hated school,” I said. “I made it through high school by the hair of my chinny-chin-chin, but that’s as far as I went. Well, I guess I did three semesters of junior college, but I hated that, too.”“How so? You seem smart.”“I’m too rebellious,” I said. “I graduated from police academy, but that was more like boot camp than academia.”“You’re a cop?”“I was. I was rebellious about that, too.”Nancy appeared with a coffee pot in hand. She was in her forties, hair pulled back in a smooth chignon over which she wore a net. She had large brown eyes, a beauty mark high on her right cheek, and the sort of body men seem to have trouble keeping their hands off. She wore a T-shirt, generously cut slacks, and brown oxfords with an inch-thick crepe sole. “You’re out early,” she remarked to Rafer. We both pushed our mugs in her direction and she filled them.“You met Kinsey?”“Not formally, but I know who she is. I’m Nancy. You talked to Alice about me.”“How are you,” I said. “I’d shake hands if I could.”“Yeah, I heard about that. Cecilia stopped by when we were opening the place. She says you took quite a hit. I can see your jaw turning blue.”I put a hand to the place. “I keep forgetting about that. It must look terrific.”“Gives you character,” she said. She glanced at Rafer. “What’s for breakfast?”He looked back at the menu. “Well, let’s see. I’m trying to keep my cholesterol up so I think I’ll have the blueberry pancakes, sausage, couple of scrambled eggs, and coffee.”“Make that two,” I said.“You want orange juice?”“Oh sure. What the heck?” he said.“Back in a flash,” she said.I saw Rafer’s gaze flicker to the window. “Excuse me. I see Alex. I’ll take him on back to the cabin and get him started.”I had to use two hands to hold my coffee mug, given that three fingers on my right hand were taped together like an oven mitt. The doctor had told me I could remove the tape after a day or two, as long as it felt comfortable. He’d given me four painkillers, neatly sealed in a small white envelope. I remembered a similar envelope from my childhood church-going days, when my nickel or dime offering was placed in the collection plate. The plate itself was wood, passed from hand to hand until it reached an usher at, the end of the pew. I’d been kicked out of any number of Sunday school classes for reasons I’ve repressed, but my Aunt Gin, feeling huffy on my behalf, decided I was entitled to go to proper church services. I suppose her intention was to expose me to spiritual admonition. Mostly what I learned was how hard it is to do an accurate visual count of organ pipes.I glanced out the window, watching Rafer cross the parking pad, heading toward the cabin in the company of a young man carrying a black case, like a doctor’s bag. I took a physical inventory, noting the sore ribs on my right side. I didn’t think my jaw was swollen, but it was clearly bruised. No teeth missing or loose. I could feel a knot on my butt the size of a silver dollar and I knew from experience it would itch like a son of a bitch for weeks on end.“Miss Millhone, can I talk to you?”I looked up. James Tennyson was standing at the table in his tan CHP uniform, complete with all its creaking paraphernalia: nightstick, flashlight, keys, holster, gun, bullets.“Sure. Have a seat.”He put a hand against his holster, securing his gun as he slid into the booth. I thought he was ill at ease, but I didn’t know him well enough to be certain. “I saw Rafer step away from the table and figured you might have a few minutes.”“This is fine. Nice to see you. You got your flashlight back?”“Yes ma’am. I appreciate your returning it. Jo found it inside the storm door when she went out to get the paper.” He pointed at my hand. “I just heard about the fellow coming after you last night. You all right?”“More or less.”“He meant business.”“I’ll survive,” I said.“The reason I came over... I didn’t even think about this until yesterday. The night Tom died? I was cruising along 395 when I spotted his truck... you know, with the hazard lights on. At first, I didn’t realize it was him because he was still some distance away, but I intended to stop and see if there was anything I could do. Anyway, there was a woman walking along the road, heading toward town.”“A woman?”“Yes ma’am. I’m almost sure.”“And she was facing you?”“That’s right, but she veered off about then. This was shortly before I passed so I didn’t get a good look at her, just a fleeting impression. She was bundled up pretty good. If it hadn’t been for Tom and trying to get help for him, I’d have cruised back in her direction in case she needed help.”“Is it unusual to see someone walking out there?”“Yes ma’am. At least, I thought it was, at the time. This was miles from anywhere and there’s very little in the way of houses out there, except for one subdivision. She could have been out for a jog, but she didn’t seem dressed for that, and in the dark? I doubt it. Anyway, it struck me as odd. I guess in my mind I was thinking she might have got mad at her boyfriend and taken off on foot. I didn’t see another vehicle so I don’t think it was a flat tire or anything like that.”“And this was no one you knew?”“I really couldn’t say. It was nobody I recognized under the circumstance. Like I said, I didn’t think much about it and later it slipped my mind entirely. I don’t even know what made me think of it. Just the fact that you asked.”I thought about it for a moment. “How far away was she from the truck when you saw her?”“It couldn’t have been a quarter of a mile because I could see Tom’s hazard lights blinking in the distance.”“Do you think she was with him?”“I suppose it’s possible,” he said. “If he was having chest pains, she might have been on her way to find help.”“Why not flag you down?”“Beats me. I don’t know what to make of it,” he said.“I’d like to see the spot where Tom’s truck was parked,” I said. “Could you maybe take me out there later?”“Sure, I’d be happy to, but the place isn’t hard to find. It’s maybe a mile in that direction. You look for a couple big boulders near a pine with the top sheared off. Thing was struck by lightning in a big storm last year. Just keep an eye out. You can’t miss it. It’s on the right-hand side.”“Thanks.”He glanced toward one of the tables near the front of the cafe. “My breakfast is here. You have any more questions, give me a call.”I watched him move away. Hatch and Macon stood together near the cash register, waiting for Nancy to take their money. My conversation with James hadn’t gone unnoticed, though both men made a big display of their disinterest. Rafer returned, entering the cafe without the technician, whom I assumed was busy at the cabin with his little brushes and powders. Rafer eased into the seat, saying, “Sorry about that. I told him we’d join him as soon as we finished here.”When we reached the cabin after breakfast, the door was standing open. I could see smudges of powder along the outside edges of the sills. Rafer introduced me to the fingerprint technician, who rolled a set of my prints for elimination purposes. Later, he’d ink a set of Cecilia’s prints, along with the prints of any cleaning or maintenance workers. He could have saved himself the trouble. The cabin yielded nothing in the way of evidence: no useful prints on the window glass, nothing on the hardware, no footprints in the damp earth leading to or from the cabin.The interior seemed dank, the bed still lumpy with the pillows I’d tucked under the pile of blankets. The place was drab. It was cold. The digital clock was blinking, which meant there’d been another power failure. The adrenaline had seeped slowly out of me like gray water down a clogged drain. I felt like crap. A rivulet of revulsion trickled over me and I was embarrassed anew at the inadequacies of my attempt to defend myself. Anxiety whispered at the base of my spine, a feathery reminder of how vulnerable I was. A memory burbled up. I was five years old again, bruised and bloodied after the wreck that killed my parents. I’d forgotten the physical pain because the wrenching emotional loss had always taken precedence.While Rafer and the tech conferred outside, talking in low tones, I hauled out my duffel and began to pack my things. I went into the bathroom, gathered up my toiletries, and tossed them in the bottom of the bag. I didn’t hear Rafer come in, but I was suddenly aware of him standing in the doorway. “You’re taking off?” he asked.“I’d be crazy to stay here.”“I agree with you on that, but I didn’t think you were finished with your investigation.”“That remains to be seen.”His gaze rested on me with concern. “You want to talk?”I looked up at him. “About what? This is a simple job to me, not some moral imperative. I’m getting paid for a piece of work. I guess I have my limits on that score.”“You’re going to quit?”“I didn’t say that. I’ll talk to Selma first and then we’ll see where we go from here.”“Look, I can see you’re upset. I’d offer you protection, but I don’t have a deputy to spare. We operate on a shoestring-”“I appreciate the sentiment. I’ll let you know what I decide.”“It wouldn’t hurt to have help. You know anybody who could pitch in on personal security?”“Oh, please. Absolutely not. I wouldn’t do that. This is strictly my problem and I’ll handle it,” I said. “Trust me, I’m not being pig-headed or proud. I hired a bodyguard once before, but this is different.”“How so?”“If that guy meant to kill me, he’d have done it last night.”“Listen, I’ve been beat up in my day and I know what it can do to you. Screws your head up. You lose your confidence. It’s like riding a horse-”“No, it’s not! I’ve been beaten up before-” I raised a hand, stopping myself with a shake of my head. “Sorry. I didn’t meant to snap at you. I know you mean well, but this is mine to deal to spend another minute in this godforsaken place.”“Well,” he said, infusing the single syllable with skepticism. He paused, silent, hands in his pockets, rocking back on his heels. I zipped the duffel, picked up my jacket and my handbag, looking around the cabin. The table was stilled littered with my papers and I’d forgotten about the Smith-Carona, still sitting in it’s place with the lid half closed. I snapped the cover into place and stuffed papers into a manila envelope that i shoved into an outer pocket of the duffel. Using my left hand, I lifted the typewriter case. “Thanks for the ride and thanks for breakfast.”“I have to get on in to work, but you let me know if there’s anything I can do to help.”: You can carry this,” I said, passing him the typewriter. He did me one better, carrying both the duffel and the Smith-Corona as he escorted me to the car. I waited until he pulled away and then I headed for the office and stuck my head into the door. There was no sign of of Cecilia. The usual table lamp was still on, but her door was shut and I imagined her catching up on the sleep she’d lost taking me to the emergency room. I got into my car and pulled out of the parking lot, turning left onto 395.I kept an eye on the odometer, clocking off a mile and then began to look for the spot where Tom’s truck had been parked the night he died. As Tennyson indicated, it wasn’t hard to find. Two massive boulders and a towering pine tree with the top missing. I could see the raw white inner wood where the lightning had slashed away at the trunk.I eased over onto the berm and parked. I got out of the car, draping my heavy leather jacket across my shoulders. There was no traffic at this hour and the morning air was silent. The sky was massed with dark gray, the mountains obscured by mist. Snow had begun to fall; big lacy flakes that settled on my face like a series of kisses. For a moment, I leaned my head back and let the snow touch my tongue.There was, of course, no remaining trace of vehicles having been parked here six weeks before. If the truck, Tennyson’s patrol car, and the ambulance had chewed up the soil and gravel along the shoulder, nature had come afterward and smoothed away any suggestion of events. I did a grid search, my gaze fixed on the barren ground as I walked a linear pattern. I imagined Tom in his pickup, the pain like a knife wedged between his shoulder blades. Nausea, clamminess, the chill sweat of Death forcing him to concentrate. For the time being, I set aside the image of the woman walking down the road. For all I knew, she was a figment of James Tennyson’s imagination, some piece of misdirection designed to throw me off. In any investigation, you have to be careful about accepting information without a touch of skepticism. I wasn’t sure of his motivation. Maybe, as implied, he was just a genuinely helpful guy who took his job seriously and wanted to apprise me of his recollection. What interested me here was the possibility that Tom had dropped his notebook out the window, or that he’d somehow destroyed the contents in the final moments of his life.I covered every inch of ground within a radius of a hundred feet. There was no notebook, no pages fluttering in the breeze, no confetti of torn paper, no nook or cranny into which such detritus might have been secreted. I kicked over rocks and dead leaves, set aside fallen branches and dug into crusty patches of snow. It was hard to believe Tom had dragged himself out here to take care of such business. I was operating on the assumption that his field notes were sensitive and that he’d made some effort to secure the confidentiality of the contents. Then again, perhaps not. The notes might not have been relevant.I returned to my car and turned the key in the ignition, not without struggle. The tape on my right hand made everything slightly awkward and I suspected that the compensatory effort over the next couple of days was going to wear me down. While the injury wasn’t major, it was annoying and inconvenient, a constant reminder that I’d suffered at someone’s hands. I did a U-turn onto the highway and headed back to Selma’s. By ten A.M., I was on the road for home.
