---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_016.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["said", "ritter", "toth", "like", "know", "one", "tom", "back", "could", "see", "yee", "way", "case", "much", "two", "time", "body", "nota", "something", "make", "death", "lake", "get", "chair", "never"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit016html

---


Unknown
FIFTEENI caught Dr. Yee on his way to the parking lot. I’d left the VW in a ninety-minute spot at the curb across from the hospital emergency room and I was circling the building, intending to enter by way of the main lobby. Dr. Yee had emerged from a side door and was preparing to cross the street to the parking garage. I called his name and he turned. I waved and he waited until I’d reached his side.Santa Teresa County still utilizes a sheriff-coroner system, in which the sheriff, as an elected official, is also in charge of the coroner’s office. The actual autopsy work is done by various forensic pathologists under contract to the county, working in conjunction with the coroner’s investigators. Steven Yee was in his forties, a third-generation Chinese American, with a passion for French cooking.“You looking for me?” He was easily six feet tall, slender and handsome, with a smooth round face. His hair was a straight glossy black streaked with exotic bands of white that he wore combed straight back.“I’m glad I caught you. Are you on your way home?I need about fifteen minutes of your time, if you can spare it.”He glanced at his watch. “I’m not due at the restaurant for another hour,” he said.“I heard about that. You have a second career.”He smiled with pleasure, shrugging modestly. “Well, the money’s not great, but I make enough here. It’s restful to chop leeks instead of... other things.”“At least you’re skilled with a boning knife,” I said.He laughed. “Believe me, nobody trims meat as meticulously as I do. You ought to come in some night. I’ll treat you to a meal that’ll make you weep for the pure pleasure.”“I could use that,” I said. “You know me and Quarter Pounders with cheese.”“So what’s up? Is this work?”“I’m looking for information about a man named Alfie Toth. Are you familiar with the case?”“Should be. I did the post,” he said. He hooked a thumb in the direction of the building. “Come on back to my office. I’ll show you what we have.”“This is great,” I said happily, as I followed him. “I understand Toth’s death may be related to a suspected homicide in Nota Lake. One of the sheriff’s investigators there was working on the case when he died of a heart attack a few weeks back. His name was Tom Newquist. Did he get in touch with you?”“I know the name, but he didn’t contact me directly. I spoke to the Nota Lake coroner by phone and he mentioned him. What’s your connection? Is this an insurance claim?”“I don’t work for CF these days. I’ve got an office in Lonnie Kingman’s law firm on Capillo.”“What happened to CF?”“They fired my sorry butt, which is fine with me,” I said. “It was time for a change so now I’m doing mostly freelance work. Newquist’s widow hired me. She says her husband was stressed out and she wants me to find out why. Nota Lake law enforcement’s been very tight-lipped on the subject and the cops here aren’t much better.”“I’ll bet.”When we reached the elevator, he punched the Down button and we chatted idly of other matters as we descended into the bowels of the building.Dr. Yee’s office was a small bare box down the hall from the morgue. The ante-room was lined with beige filing cabinets, the office itself barely large enough for his big rolltop desk, his swivel chair, and a plain wooden chair for guests. His medical books had been moved to the shelves of a freestanding bookcase and the top of his desk was now reserved for a neat row of French cookbooks, trussed on either side by a large jar of murky formalin in which floated something I didn’t care to inspect. He was using a gel breast implant as a paperweight, securing a pile of loose notes. “Hang on a second and I’ll pull the file,” he said. “Have a seat.”The chair was stacked with medical journals so I perched on the edge, grateful Dr. Yee was willing to trust me. Dr. Yee was never careless with information, but he wasn’t as paranoid as the police detectives. He returned with a file folder and a manila envelope and took his seat in the swivel chair, tossing both on the desk beside me.“Are those the photographs? Can I see?”“Sure, but they won’t tell you much.” He reached for the envelope and extracted a set of color photographs, eight-by-ten prints showing various views of the scene where Alfie Toth had been found. The terrain was clearly rugged: boulders, chaparral, an ancient live oak. “Toth was identified through his skeletal remains, largely dental work. Percy Ritter’s body in Nota Lake was found in much the same circumstances; same MO and a similar remote locale. In both cases, it took a while before anyone stumbled across the remains.”I paused, staring at one close-up view with perplexity, not quite sure what I was looking at; probably the lower half of Alfie Toth’s body crumpled on the ground. The pelvic bones appeared to be still joined, but the femur, tibia, and fibulas were tangled together in a heap, like bleached kindling. The haphazard skeletal assortment looked like a Halloween decoration badly in need of assembly.Dr. Yee was saying, “Ritter’s mummified body was found fully clothed with various personal items in his pockets... expired California driver’s license, credit cards. Identification was confirmed by his fingerprints, which had to be reconstituted. Must have been dry out there because bacterial growth and putrefaction are halted when the body moisture diminishes below fifty percent. Ritter’s flesh was as stiff as leather, but Kirchner managed to retrieve all but the right-hand thumb and ring finger. Ritter’d had his prints in the system since 1972. What a bad ass. Real scum.”“I didn’t know you could salvage prints like that.”He shrugged. “You sometimes have to sever the fingers first. To rehydrate, you can soak ’em in a three percent lye solution or a one percent solution of Eastman Kodak Photo-Flo 200 for a day or two. Another method is to use successive alcohol solutions, starting at ninety percent and gradually decreasing. With Ritter, the first presumption was of suicide, though Kirchner said he had big doubts and the county sheriff did, too. Keep in mind, there wasn’t any suicide note at the scene, but there was also no environmental disorder and no signs of trauma on the body. No fractured hyoid to suggest cervical compression, no evidence of knife wounds, skull fractures, gunshot-”“In other words, no signs of foul play.”“Right. Which is not to say he couldn’t have been subdued in some way. Same thing with Toth, except there was no personal ID. Sheriff’s department went back through months’ worth of missing-persons reports, contacting relatives. They made the initial match that way.”“So what are we looking at?” I asked, turning the photograph so he could see.“To all appearances, both guys tied a rope around a boulder, put a noose around their necks, pushed the rock through the Y of a tree limb, and hung themselves. It wasn’t until later that the similarities came to light.”I stared at him. “That’s odd.” I glanced down at a photograph, in which I could now see the crisscross of rope circling the circumference of a rock about the size of a large watermelon. Toth’s torso and extremities had separated, falling in a tumble on one side of the tree while the upper half of his body, pulled by the weight of the boulder, had fallen on the other still attached by the length of rope.“Nothing remarkable about the rope, in case you’re wondering. Garden variety clothes line available at any supermarket or hardware store,” he said. Dr. Yee watched my face. “Not to be racist about it, but the method’s more compatible with an Asian sensibility. Some dude out in Nota County, how’d it even occur to him? And then a second one here? I mean, it’s possible Toth heard about his pal’s alleged suicide and imitated his methodology, but even so, it seems off. As far as I know, the Nota Lake cops kept the specifics to themselves. That was information only shared between agencies.”“Really. If Alfie Toth wanted to kill himself, you’d think he’d blow his brains out; something simple and straightforward, more in keeping with his lifestyle.”Dr. Yee shifted back in his chair with a squeak. “A more plausible explanation is that both victims were killed by the same party. The reason the cops are so paranoid is to avoid all the kooks and the copycats. Someone ups and confesses, you don’t want anyone other than the killer in possession of the details. So far the papers haven’t gotten wind of it. They know a body was found here, but that’s about the extent of it. I’m not sure reporters have put two and two together with the deceased in Nota Lake. That didn’t get any play here.”“What’s the estimated time of death for Ritter?”“Oh, he’d been there five years from Kirchner’s estimate. A gasoline receipt among his effects was dated April 1981. Gas station attendant remembers the two of them.”“Quite a gap between deaths,” I said. “Have you ever run across a methodology like this?”“Only in a textbook. That’s what makes it curious. Take a look at this.” He reached backward and pulled a thin oversized volume from the bottom shelf. “Tornio Watanabe’s Atlas o f Legal Medicine. This was first published in ‘sixty-eight, printed in Japan, so it’s hard to find these days.” He flipped the pages open to a section on hangings and turned the book so I could see. The photographs were of Japanese suicide victims, apparently supplied by various police headquarters and medical examiners’ offices in Japan. One young woman had wedged her neck in the V of a tree, which effectively compressed her carotid and vertebral arteries. Another woman had made a double loop of long rope, which she wound around her neck and then put her feet through, achieving strangulation by ligature. In the method Dr. Yee’d referred to, a man tied a rope around a stone, which he placed on a chair. He’d wrapped the same rope around his neck, sat with his back to the chair back, and then tilted the chair forward so the stone rolled off the seat and strangled him. I studied the photographs on adjoining pages, which depicted in graphic detail the ingenuity employed by human beings in extinguishing their lives. In every case, I was looking at the face of despair. I stared at the floor for a moment, running the scenario through my head like a piece of film. “There’s no way two men on opposite sides of California would have independently devised the same method.”“Probably not,” he said. “Though, given the fact they were friends, it’s possible they overheard someone describe the technique. If you’re intent on suicide, the beauty of it is once you topple the boulder through the fork in the tree, there’s no way back. Also, death is reasonably quick; not instantaneous, but you’d lose consciousness within a minute or less.”“And these are the only two deaths of this kind that you know of?”“That’s right. I don’t think this is serial, but the two have to be connected.”“How’d you hear about Ritter’s death?”“Through Newquist. He’d known about Ritter since his body was discovered back in March of this past year. When a backpacker came across Toth, he reported it to the local sheriff’s department and they contacted Nota Lake because of the similar MO.”“Isn’t there a chance Toth killed his friend Ritter, hoping to make it look like suicide instead of murder, and then ended up killing himself the same way? There’d be a certain irony in that.”“It’s possible,” he said dubiously, “but what’s your picture? Toth commits a murder and five years pass before he finds himself overwhelmed with guilt?”“Doesn’t make much sense, does it?” I said, in response to his tone. “I talked to his ex-wife and from what she said, he wasn’t behaving like a man who was terminally depressed.” I checked my watch. It was close to 4:45. “Anyway, I better let you go. I appreciate the information. This has been a big help.”“My pleasure.”When I got home at five o’clock, Henry’s kitchen lights were on and I found him sitting at his kitchen table with a file box in front of him. I tapped on the glass and he motioned me in. “Help yourself to a cup of tea. I just made a pot.”“Thanks.” I took a clean mug from the dish rack and poured myself a cup of tea, then sat at the kitchen table watching Henry work.“These are rebate coupons. A new passion of mine in case you’re wondering,” he said. Henry had always been enthusiastic about saving money, sitting down daily with the local paper to clip and sort coupons in preparation for his shopping trips.“Can I help?”“You can file while I cut,” he said. He passed me a pile of proof of purchase seals, which I could see were separated according to the company offering to refund a portion of the price. He was saying, “Short’s Drugs has started a Receipt Savers Rebate. Club, which allows you to collect your rebates and send them in all at once. There’s no point in trying to get fifty cents back when it costs you nearly thirty-five cents for stamps.”“I can’t believe the time you put in on this,” I remarked as I filed. Over-the-counter diet remedies, detergent, soap, mouthwash.“Some are products I use anyway so who can resist? Look at this one. Free toothpaste. Makes your smile extra white it says.”“Your smile’s already white.”“Suppose I end up preferring the taste of this one. There’s no harm in trying something new,” he said.“Here’s one for shampoo. You get one free if you buy before April First. Only one per customer and I’ve got mine already, so I kept this for you if you’re interested.”“Thanks. You do this in addition to the store coupons?”“Well, yes, but this takes a lot more patience. Sometimes it takes as long as two to three months, but then you get a nice big check. Fifteen bucks once. Like found money. You’d be surprised how quickly it adds up.”“I’ll bet.” I took a sip of my tea.Henry passed me another ragged pile of clippings. “When you finish that batch, you can start on these.”“I don’t mean to sound petty,” I said, bringing the conversation around to my concerns, “but honestly, Rosie paid more attention to those rowdies than she did to us last night. It didn’t hurt my feelings so much as piss me off.”Henry seemed to smile to himself. “Aren’t you overstating your case?”“Well, it may be too strong a term, but you get my point. Henry, how much children’s aspirin do you take these days? I counted fifteen of these.”“I donate the extras to charity. Speaking of pain relievers, how’s your hand?”“Good. Much better. It hardly hurts,” I said. “I take it Rosie’s attitude doesn’t bother you.”“Rosie’s Rosie. She’s never going to change. If it bugs you, tell her. Don’t complain to me.”“Oh right. I see. You want me to take the point.”“Battle of the Titans. I’d like to see that,” he remarked.At six, I left Henry’s, stopping by my apartment to pick up my umbrella and a jacket. Once again, the rain had eased off, but the cold saturated the air, making me grateful to step into the tavern. Rosie’s was quiet, the air scented with the pungent smell of cauliflower, onions, garlic, bacon, and simmering beef. There were two patrons sitting in a booth, but I could see they’d been served. The occasional clink of flatware on china was the only sound I heard.Rosie was sitting at the bar by herself, absorbed in the evening paper, which was open in front of her. A small television set was turned on at the far end of the bar, the sound muted. There was no sign of William and I realized if I was going to catch her, this would be my only chance. I could feel my heart thump. My bravery seldom extends to interactions of this kind. I pulled out the stool next to hers and perched. “Something smells good.”“Lot of somethings,” she said. “I got William fixing deep-fried cauliflower with sour cream sauce. Also hot pickled beef, and beef tongue with tomato sauce.”“My favorite,” I said dryly.Behind us, the door opened and a foursome came in, admitting a rush of cold air before the door banged shut again. Rosie eased down off her stool and moved across the room to greet them, playing hostess for once. The door opened again and Colleen Sellers was suddenly standing in the entrance. What was she doing here? So much for my confrontation with Rosie. Maybe Colleen had decided to give me some help.“I don’t even know what I’m doing here,” she said, glumly. Her blond hair drooped with the damp and her glasses had fogged over from the heat in the place.“Talking about Tom.”“I guess.”“You want to tell me the rest of it?”“There’s nothing much to tell.”We were seated in the back booth I usually claim as my own. I’d poured her a glass of wine that was now sitting in front of her untouched. She removed her glasses, holding them by the frames while she pulled a paper napkin from the dispenser and cleaned the lenses in a way that made me worry she was scratching them. Without the glasses, she looked vulnerable, the misery palpable in the air between us.“When did you first meet him?”“At a conference up in Redding a year ago. He was there by himself. I never did meet his wife. She didn’t like to come with him, or at least that’s what I heard. I gathered she was a bit of a pain in the ass. Not that he ever admitted it, but other people said as much. I don’t know what her gig was. He always spoke of her like she was some kind of goddess.” She pushed her hair back from her face and tucked it behind her ears in a style that wasn’t flattering. She put on her glasses again and I could see smears on the lenses.“Did you meet by chance or by design?”Colleen rolled her eyes and a weary smile played around her mouth. “I can see where you’re headed, but okay... I’ll bite. I knew he was going to be there and I looked him up. How’s that?”I smiled back at her. “You want to tell it your way?”“I’d appreciate that,” she said dryly. “Until the conference in Redding, I only dealt with him by phone. He sounded terrific so naturally, I Wanted to meet him in person. We hit it off right away, chatting about various cases we’d worked, at least the interesting ones. You know how it is, trading professional tales. We got talking department politics, his experiences versus mine, the usual stuff.”“I don’t mean to sound accusatory, but someone seemed to think the two of you were very chummy.”“Chummy?”“That you were flirtatious. I’m just telling you what I heard.”“There’s no law against flirting. Tom was a doll. I never knew a man yet who couldn’t use a little boost to his ego, especially at our age. My god. Who the hell’s telling you this stuff? Someone trying to make trouble, I can tell you that.”“How well did you know him?”“I only saw him twice. No, correction. I saw him three times. It was all work at first, starting with the case he was on.”“What case was that?”“County sheriff up in Nota Lake found an apparent suicide in the desert, an ex-con named Ritter, who’d hung himself from a branch of a California white oak. Identification was confirmed through his fingerprints and Tom tracked him back as far as his release from Chino in the spring of ‘eighty-one. Ritter had family in this area; Perdido to be precise. He talked to them by phone and they told him Ritter’d been traveling with a pal.”“Alfie Toth,” I supplied. I was curious to hear her version, but I didn’t want her to think I was completely ignorant of the facts.“How’d you hear about him?” she asked.“Hey, I have my sources just like you have yours. I know Tom drove down here in June to look for him.”“That’s right. I was the one got a line on the guy. Toth had been arrested here on a minor charge. I called Tom and he said he’d be down within a day. This was mid-April. I told him I’d be happy to make the contact, but he preferred doing it himself. I guess he got caught up in work and it was June by the time he made it down here. By then, Toth was gone.”“So Tom never talked to him?”“Not that I know of. As it turned out, Toth’s body was the one found in January of this year. The minute the ID was made, I called Tom. The MO was the same for both Ritter and Toth and that was worrisome. The two deaths had to be related, but it was tough to determine what the motivation might have been.”“From what I hear, the murders were separated by a five-year time gap. You have a theory about that?”I could see her mouth pull down and she wagged her head to convey her ambivalence. “This was one time when Tom and I didn’t agree on anything. It could have been a double-cross... you know, a bank heist or burglary with Ritter and his sidekick betraying an accomplice. Fellow catches up with them and kills Ritter on the spot. Then it takes another five years to hunt down his pal, Toth.”“What was Tom’s idea?”“Well, he thought Toth might have been a witness to Ritter’s murder. Something happens in the mountains and Pinkie Ritter dies. Toth manages to get away and eventually the killer catches up with him.”I said, “Or maybe Alvin Toth killed Ritter and someone else came along and avenged Ritter’s death.”She smiled briefly. “As a matter of fact, I suggested that myself, but Tom was convinced the perpetrator was the same in both cases.”I thought about Dr. Yee’s assessment, which was the same as Tom’s. “It would help if I knew how to get in touch with Ritter’s family.”“I can give you the phone number. I don’t have it with me, but I could call you later if you like.”“That’d be great. One other thing. I know this is none of my business, but were you in love with Tom? Because that’s what I’m picking up, reading between the lines,” I said.Her body language altered and I could see her debate with herself about how much to reveal. “Tom was loyal as a dog, completely devoted to his wife, which he let me know right off the bat. Ain’t that always the way? All the good men are married.”“So they say.”“But I’ll tell you something. We had real chemistry between us. It’s the first time I ever understood the term soul mate. You know what I mean? We were soul mates. No kidding. It was like finding myself in this other guise... my spiritual counterpart... and that was heady stuff. We’d be in a room together with five or six hundred other people and I always knew where he was. It was like tentacles stretching all the way across the auditorium. I wouldn’t even have to look for him. The bond was that strong. There wasn’t anything I couldn’t say to him. And laugh? God, we laughed.”“You go to bed with him?” I asked, casually.A blush began to saturate Colleen’s cheeks. “No, but I would have. Hell, I was so crazy about him I broached the subject myself. I was shameless. I was wanton. I’d have taken him on any basis... just to be with him once.” She shook her head. “He wouldn’t do it, and you know why? He was honorable. Decent. Can you imagine the gall of it in this day and age? Tom was an honorable man. He made a promise to be faithful and he meant it. That’s one of the things I admired most about him.”“Maybe it’s just as well. He wouldn’t have been good at deceit even if he’d been willing to try.”“So I’ve told myself.”“You miss him,” I said.“I’ve cried every day since I heard about his death. I never even had the chance to say goodbye to him.”“It must be tough.”“Awful. It’s just awful. I miss him more than I missed my own mother when she died. So maybe if I’d slept with him, I’d have had to kill myself or something. Maybe the loss and the pain would have been impossible to bear.”“You might have had less respect for him if he’d given in.”“That’s a risk I’d have taken, given half a chance.”“At any rate, I’m sorry for your pain.”“No sorrier than I am. I’m never going to find another guy like him. So what can you do? You soldier on. At least his wife has the luxury to mourn in public. Is she taking it hard?”“That’s why she hired me, trying to find relief.”Colleen looked away from me casually, trying to conceal her interest. “What’s she like?”I thought for a moment, trying to be fair. “Generous with her time. Terribly insecure. Efficient. She smokes. Sort of hard-looking, platinum blond hair teased out to here. She has slightly gaudy taste and she’s crazy about her son, Brant. This was Tom’s stepson.”“Do you like her? Is she nice?”“People claim she’s neurotic, but I do like the woman. A few don’t, but that’s true of all of us. There’s always someone who thinks we’re dogshit.”“Did she love him?”“Very much, I’d say. It was probably a good marriage... maybe not perfect, but it worked. She doesn’t like the idea of his dying with unfinished business.”“Back to that,” she said.“I’d do the same for you if you hired me to find answers.”Colleen’s gaze came back to mine. “You thought it was me. That we were having an affair.”“It crossed my mind.”“If I’d had an affair with him, would you have told his wife the truth?”“No. What purpose would it serve?”“Right.” She was silent for a moment.“Do you know why Tom was so distressed?” I asked.“I might.”“Why so protective?”“It’s not up to me to ease her mind,” she said. “Who’s easing mine?”I held my hands up in surrender. “I’m just asking the question. You have to do as you see fit.”“I have to go,” she said abruptly, gathering up her coat. “I’ll call you later with the phone number for Ritter’s daughter.”I held a finger up. “Hang on. I just remembered. I have something for you if you’re interested.” I reached into the outer zippered compartment of my shoulder bag and pulled out one of the black-and-white photographs of Tom at the April banquet. “I had these done up in case I needed ’em. You might like to have something to remember him by.”She took the picture without comment, a slight smile playing across her mouth as she studied it.I said, “I never met him myself, but I thought it captured him.”She looked up at me with tears rimming her eyes. “Thank you.”
