---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_021.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["said", "could", "tom", "like", "rafer", "night", "got", "around", "barrett", "nancy", "car", "went", "way", "someone", "took", "right", "counter", "toth", "guy", "would", "saw", "never", "idea", "hand", "time"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit021html

---


Unknown
TWENTYOnce out of sight, I pulled over and parked on a side street to assess my situation. The word had clearly gone out, but I wasn’t sure whether these guys were cueing off my car or my personal description. I removed my leather bomber jacket and tossed it in the backseat, then rooted through the assorted garments I keep for just such emergencies. I donned a plain red sweatshirt, a pair of sunglasses, and a Dodgers baseball cap. I got out, opened the trunk, and took out the five-gallon gasoline can I keep in there. I locked the car and hiked over to the main street where I headed for a service station I hadn’t tried so far.I bypassed the office and went straight to the service bay, where a cursing mechanic was struggling to loosen a stubborn lug nut on a flat tire. I checked the sign posted by the door that said MECHANIC ON DUTY with the guy’s name ED BOONE on a plastic plaque inserted in the slot. I moved out of the bay and sidled up to the office where I poked my head in the door. The attendant was maybe nineteen, with a bleach-blond crew cut and green painted fingernails, his attentions focused on the glossy pages of a pornographic magazine.“Uncle Eddy told me I could fill this. My pickup ran out of gas about a block from here. This is mine, by the way,” I said, holding up the can. I didn’t want the fellow claiming later that I’d stolen it. Given my current reputation as a stone-cold killer, the theft of a gasoline can would have been right in character. I fancied I saw a flicker of uncertainty cross his face, but I went about my business like I owned the place.I walked to the self-serve pump, giving him a sidelong glance to see if he was on the telephone. He stared through the plate glass window, watching me without expression as I filled the container. The total was $7.45. I returned to the office and handed him a ten, which he tucked in his pocket without offering change. His gaze dropped to his magazine again as I walked off. Nice to know that regardless of how low you sink, someone’s always willing to make a profit at your expense. I returned to my car, where I emptied the five gallons of gasoline into my tank. I returned the can to the trunk and took off with the gauge now sitting at the halfway mark.My heart was beating as though I’d run a race and perhaps I had. Apparently, my actions would be observed and curtailed wherever possible from here on. Never had I felt quite so alienated from my surroundings. I was already on unfamiliar turf and in subtle and not-so-subtle ways, I depended on the ordinary day-to-day pleasantries for my sense of well-being. Now I was being shunned and the process was scaring the shit out of me. Scouring the moving traffic, I realized my pale blue VW was highly visible among all the pickups, campers, utility vehicles, horse vans, and 4x4s.Six miles out of town, I pulled into the gravel apron of the Rainbow Cafe, angling around to the left where I backed into a parking spot on the far side of the big garbage bins. I sat for a moment, trying to get “centered,” as Californians say. I’ve no idea what the term means, but in my present circumstance, it seemed applicable. If I was being banished from the tribe, I better make sure I had a grip on my “self” before I went any further. I took a couple of deep breaths and got out. The morning was overcast, the mountains looming in the distance like an accumulation of thunder clouds. Down here, where large tracts of land stretched out empty and desolate, the wind whistled along the surface, chilling everything in its path. Snow flurries, like dust motes, hung in the icy air.Crossing the gravel parking area, I felt extraordinarily conspicuous. I glanced at the cafe windows and could have sworn I saw two customers stare at me and then avert their eyes. A chill went through me, all the ancient power of ostracism by the clan. I imagined church services in progress, the Catholics and the Baptists and the Lutherans all singing hymns and giving thanks, attentive to their respective sermons. Afterward, the Nota Lake devout would crowd into the local restaurants, still dressed in their Sunday best and eager for lunch. I said a little prayer of my own as I pushed through the door.The cafe was sparsely occupied. I did a quick visual sweep. James Tennyson was sitting at the counter with a cup of coffee. He wore jeans, the newspaper open in front of him. Close at hand were an empty water glass and a crumpled blue-and-black Alka-Seltzer packet.There was no sign of his wife, Jo, or his baby, whose name escaped me. Rafer’s daughter, Barrett, with her back to me, was working the grill. She wore a big white apron over jeans and a T-shirt. A white chef’s toque concealed her springy, fly-away hair. Deftly, she wielded her spatula, rolling sausage links, flipping a quartet of pancakes. While I watched, she moved the steaming food to a pair of waiting plates. Nancy picked up the order and delivered it to the couple sitting by the window. Rafer and Vicky LaMott sat in the booth midway down the line of empty tables. They’d finished eating and I could see that Vicky was in the process of collecting her handbag and overcoat. James looked baggy-eyed and drawn. He caught sight of me and nodded, his manner a perfect blend of good manners and restraint. His fair-skinned good looks were only slightly marred by what I imagined was a hangover. I headed for a booth in the far corner, murmuring a greeting to Rafer and Vicky as I breezed by. I was afraid to wait for a response lest they cut me dead. I sat down and positioned myself so I could keep an eye on the door.Nancy caught my attention. She seemed distracted, but not unfriendly, crossing toward the counter to pick up a side of oatmeal. “I’ll be with you in just a minute. You want coffee?”“I’d love some.” Apparently, she wasn’t a party to the social boycott. Alice, the night before, had been friendly as well... at least to the point of warning me about the freeze coming up. Maybe it was just the guys who were shutting me out; not a comforting thought. It was a man, after all, who’d dislocated my fingers only three days earlier. I found myself rubbing the joints, noticing for the first time that the swelling and the bruises gave them the appearance of exotic, barely ripe bananas. I turned my crockery mug upright in anticipation of the coffee, noting that the fingers still refused to bend properly. It felt like the skin had stiffened, preventing flexion.While I waited for service, I studied James in profile, wondering about his contact with Pinkie Ritter and Alfie Toth. As a CHP officer, he would have been removed from any sheriff’s department action, but he might have exploited his friendships with the deputies to glean information about the homicide investigation. He was certainly first at the scene the night Tom died, giving him the perfect opportunity to lift Tom’s notes. I was still toying with the possibility that he invented the walking woman, though his motive remained opaque. It wasn’t Colleen. She’d assured me she’d never visited the area, a claim I tended to believe. Tom had too much to lose if he were seen with her. Besides, if she’d been in the truck, she wouldn’t have deserted him.The LaMotts emerged from their booth, hunching into overcoats in preparation for their departure. Vicky crossed to the counter to chat with Barrett while Rafer moved to the register and paid the check. As usual, Nancy did double duty, setting her coffee pot aside to take his twenty and make change. James rose at the same time, leaving his money on the counter beside his plate. He and Rafer exchanged a few words and I saw Rafer glance my way. James pulled on his jacket and left the restaurant without a backward look. Vicky joined her husband, who must have told her to go out and wait for him in the car. She nodded and then busied herself with her gloves and knit cap. I wasn’t sure if she was ignoring me or not.Once she was gone, Rafer ambled in my direction, his hands in his coat pockets, a red cashmere scarf wrapped around his neck. The coat was beautifully cut, a dark chocolate brown setting off the color of his skin. The man did dress well.“Hello, Detective LaMott,” I said.“Rafer,” he corrected. “How’s the hand?”“Still attached to my arm.” I held my fingers up, wiggling them as though the gesture didn’t hurt.“Mind if I sit down?”I indicated the place across from me and he slid into the booth. He seemed ill-at-ease, but his expression was sympathetic and his hazel eyes showed disquiet, not the coldness or hostility I’d half-expected. “I had a long talk with some Santa Teresa fellows about you.”I felt my heart start to thump. “Really. Who?”“Coroner, couple cops. Homicide detective named Jonah Robb,” he said. He put one elbow on the table, tapping with his index finger while he stared out across the room.“Ah. Tracking down the stories going around about me.”His gaze slid back to mine. “That’s right. I might as well tell you, from the perspective of the sheriff’s department, you’re okay, but I’ve heard rumbles I don’t like and I’m concerned.”“I’m not all that comfortable myself, but I don’t see any way around it. Responding to rumors only makes you look guilty and defensive. I know because I tried it and got nowhere.”He stirred restlessly. He turned in the seat until he was facing me squarely, his hands laced in front of him. His voice dropped a notch. “Listen, I know about your suspicions. Why don’t you tell me what you have and I’ll do what I can to help.”I said, “Great,” wondering why I didn’t sound more sincere and enthusiastic. I thought about it briefly, experiencing a frisson of uneasiness. “I’ll tell you what concerns me at the moment. A plainclothes detective or someone posing as one-showed up at a fleabag hotel in Santa Teresa with a warrant for Toth’s arrest. The Santa Teresa Sheriff’s Department has no record of an outstanding warrant anywhere in the system, so the paper was probably bogus, but I don’t have a way to check that because I don’t have access to the computer.”“I can run that,” he said smoothly. “What else?”I found myself choosing my words with care. “I think the guy was a phoney, too. He might have been a cop, but I think he misrepresented himself.”“What name did he give?”“I asked about that, but the clerk I talked to wasn’t on the desk that day and he claims the other fellow didn’t get a name.”“You think it was someone in our department,” he said, making it a statement, not a question.“Possibly.”“Based on what?”“Well, doesn’t the timing seem a tiny bit coincidental?”“How so?”“Tom wanted to talk to Toth in connection with Pinkie Ritter’s death. The other guy got there first and that was the end of poor old Alfie. Tom was a basket case starting in mid-January when Toth’s body turned up, right?”“That’s Selma’s claim.” Rafer’s manner was now guarded and he started tapping, the tip of his index finger drumming a rapid series of beats. Maybe he was sending me a message in Morse code.“So isn’t it possible this is what Tom was brooding about? I mean, what else could it be?”“Tom was a consummate professional for thirty-five years. He was the investigating officer in a homicide matter that I would say, yes, captured his interest, but no, did not in any way cause him to lie awake at night and bite his nails. Of course he thought about his work, but it didn’t cause his heart attack. The idea’s absurd.”“If he was under a great deal of stress, couldn’t that have been a contributing factor?”“Why would Toth’s death cause him any stress at all? This was his job. He never even met the man, as far as I know.”“He felt responsible.”“For what?”“Toth’s murder. Tom believed someone gained access to his notebook where he’d jotted down Toth’s temporary address and the phone number at the Gramercy.”“How do you know what Tom believed?”“Because that’s what he confided to another sheriff’s investigator.”“Colleen Sellers.”“That’s right.”“And Tom told her this?”“Well, not explicitly. But that’s how the killer could have found Toth and murdered him,” I said.“You still haven’t said why you suspect someone from our department.”“I’ll broaden the claim. Let’s say, someone in law enforcement.”“You’re fishing.”“Who else had access to his notes?”“Everyone,” he said. “His wife, his son, Brant. Half the time, the house was unlocked. Add his cleaning lady, the yard man, his next-door neighbor, the guy across the street. None of them are involved in law enforcement, but any one of them could have opened his front door and walked right in. And what makes you so sure it wasn’t someone in Santa Teresa? The leak didn’t necessarily come from this end.”I stared at him. “You’re right,” I said. He had a point.The tapping stopped and his manner softened. “Why don’t you back off and let us handle this?”“Handle what?”“We haven’t been entirely idle. We’re developing a lead.”“I’m glad to hear that. About bloody time. I hate to think I’m the only one out here with my ass on the line.”“Cut the sarcasm and don’t push. Not your job.”“Are you saying you have a line on Alfie’s killer?”“I’m saying you’d be smart to go home and let us take it from here.”“What about Selma?”“She knows better than to interfere with an official investigation. So do you.”I tried Selma’s line. “There’s no law against asking questions.”“That depends on who you ask.” He glanced at his watch. “I got Vick in the car and we’re late for church,” he said. He got up and adjusted his coat, taking his leather gloves from one pocket. I watched him smooth them into place and thought, inexplicably, of his early morning arrival at the emergency room; freshly showered and shaven, nattily dressed, wide awake. He looked down at me. “Did anyone ever fill you in on local history?”“Cecilia did.”He went on talking as if I hadn’t spoken. “Bunch of convicts were shipped to the colonies from England. These were hardened criminals, literally branded for the heinousness of their behavior.”“The ‘Nota’ of Nota Lake,” I supplied dutifully.“That’s right. The worst of ’em came west and settled in these mountains. What you’re dealing with now are their descendants. You want to watch your step.”I laughed, uneasily. “What, this is like a Western? I’m being warned off? I have to be out of town by sundown?”“Not a warning, a suggestion. For your own good,” he said.I watched him leave the restaurant and realized how dry my mouth had become. I had that feeling I used to get before the first day of school, a low-level dread that acted as an appetite suppressant. Breakfast didn’t sound like such a hot idea. The place had cleared out. The couple by the window were getting up to leave. I saw them pay their check, Barrett taking over the cash register while Nancy hurried in my direction with a coffee pot and menu, all apologies. She handed me the menu. “Sorry it took me so long, but I was brewing a new pot and I could see you and Rafer had your heads together,” she said. She filled my mug with hot coffee. “You have any idea what you want to eat? I don’t mean to rush you. Take your time. I just don’t want to hold you up, you’ve been so patient.”“I’m not hungry,” I said. “Why don’t I move to the counter so we can talk?”“Sure thing.”I picked up my mug and reached for the silverware.“I’ll get that,” she said. She took the menu and the flatware, moving to the counter where she set a place for me between the griddle and the cash register. Barrett was in the process of cleaning the grill with a flat-edged spatula. Bacon fat and browned particles of pancake and sausage were being pushed into the well. Nancy rinsed a rag and twisted out the excess water, wiping the counter clean. “Alice says you’ve been asking about Pinkie Ritter.”“You remember him?”“Every woman in Nota Lake remembers him,” she said, tartly.“Did he ever bother you?”“Meaning what, unwanted sexual advances? He attacked me one night when I got off work. He waited in the parking lot and grabbed me by the neck as I was getting in my car. I kicked his ass up between his shoulder blades and that was the last of that. He was convicted of rape twice and that’s just the times he was caught.”“Did you report it?”“What for? I took care of it myself. What’s the law going to do, come along afterwards and smack his hand?”Barrett had now come over to the small sink just below the counter in front of us and she was in the process of rinsing plates and arranging them in the rack for the industrial dishwasher I assumed was in the rear. She had her father’s light eyes and she made no secret of the fact that she was listening to Nancy’s tale and enjoying her attitude.I caught her attention. “Did he ever come on to you?”“Uhn-uhn. No way,” she said, a blush creeping up her cheeks. “I was close to jailbait at that point, barely eighteen years old. He knew better than to mess with me.”I turned to Nancy. “What about other women? Anyone in particular? Earlene or Phyllis?”Nancy shook her head. “Not that I heard, but that doesn’t mean he didn’t try. Guy like that goes after anyone who seems weak.”“Could I ask you about something else?”“Sure.”“The night Tom Newquist died, he was in here earlier, wasn’t he?”“That’s right. He came in about nine o’clock. Ordered a cheeseburger and fries, sat around and smoked, cigarettes, like he was killing time. Occasionally he’d look at his watch. I couldn’t figure it out. He never came in at that hour. I figured he was meeting someone, but she never showed up.”“Why do you say ‘she’? Couldn’t it have been a man?”Nancy seemed surprised at the idea. “I never thought about that. I just assumed.”“Did he mention anyone by name?”“No.”“Did he use the telephone?”She shook her head with some uncertainty and then turned to Barrett with a quizzical look. “You remember if Tom Newquist used the phone that night?”“Not that I saw.”Again, I directed a question to Barrett. “Did you get the impression he was here to meet someone?”Barrett shrugged. “I guess.”Nancy spoke up again. “You know what I think it was? He was freshly shaved. I remember remarking about his cologne or his aftershave. He looked sharp, like he’d gussied himself up. He wouldn’t do that if he were here to meet some guy.”“You agree with that?” I asked Barrett.“He did look nice, now you mention it,” she said. “I noticed that myself.”“Did he seem annoyed or upset, like he’d been stood up?”“Not a bit of it,” Nancy said. “Nine-thirty, got up, paid his check, and went out to his truck. I never saw him afterwards. I did closing that night so I was stuck in here. Did you see him out there?”“In the parking lot? Not me.”“You must have. You took off shortly before he did.”Barrett thought about it, frowning slightly before she shook her head. “Maybe he was parked around back.”“Where were you parked that night?” I asked.“Nowhere. I didn’t have a car. My dad was picking me up.”“She lives just over there on the other side of that subdivision, but her folks don’t like her walking home at night. They’re real protective, especially her dad.”Barrett smiled, her dark skin underlined with the pink of her embarrassment. “I could be a preacher’s daughter. That’d be worse.”We chatted on for a while. The place began to fill with the early church service crowd and I was clearly in the way. I was also hoping to avoid further confrontation with any irate citizens. I hunched into my jacket and went out to the car. Since the parking spot I’d found was around to the rear, I didn’t think I was visible to passing vehicles. I didn’t have the nerve to drive into town just yet. I couldn’t bear the idea of wandering around on my own, risking rudeness and rejection on the basis of floating rumors. People in the cafe had been fine so maybe it was just the service station attendants who’d passed a vote of no confidence.I saw Macon Newquist pull off the highway and into the parking lot in a pickup truck. He was dressed in a suit that looked as unnatural on him as a bunny costume. I knew if he saw me, he’d start pumping me for information. I torqued myself around, reaching for my briefcase as though otherwise occupied. Along with my case notes, I’d tucked in the packets of index cards. I waited until he disappeared into the cafe before I got out of the car and locked it. I took my briefcase with me as I crunched along the berm to the Nota Lake Cabins.Out front, the red Vacancy sign was lighted. The office lobby was unlocked and there was a flat plastic clock face hanging on the doorknob with the hands pointing to 11:30. The sign said BACK IN A JIFFY. I went in, crossing to the half-door that opened onto the empty office. “Cecilia? Are you here?”There was no answer.I was tempted, as usual, by the sight of all those seductive-looking desk drawers. The Rolodex and the file cabinets fairly begged to be searched, but I couldn’t for the life of me think what purpose it would serve. I sat down in the upholstered chair and opened a pack of index cards. I began to read through my notes, transferring one piece of information to each card with a borrowed ballpoint pen. In some ways, this was busywork. I could feel productive and efficient while sheltered from public scrutiny. Transcribing my notes had the further advantage of diverting my attention from the state of discomfort in which I found myself. Whereas last night I longed for home, I couldn’t picture turning tail and running on the basis of Rafer’s veiled “suggestion” about my personal safety. So what was I doing? Trying to satisfy myself that I’d done what I could. The deal I made with myself was to keep following leads until the trail ran out. If I came up against a blank wall, then I could return home with a clear conscience. In the meantime, I had a job and I was intent on doing it. Yeah, right, you chickenshit, I thought.I went through a pack and a half of index cards without any startling revelations. I shuffled them twice and laid them out like a hand of solitaire, scanning row after row for telling details. For instance, I’d made a note that Cecilia’d told me she. got home around ten o’clock the night Tom died. She said she’d seen the ambulance, but had no idea it had been summoned for her brother. Could she have seen the woman walking down the road? It occurred to me the woman might have been staying at the Nota Lake Cabins, in which case her stroll might not have had anything to do with Tom. Worth asking, at any rate, just to eliminate the issue.
