---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "N is for Noose - index_split_009.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - N is for Noose"
tags: ["like", "tom", "selma", "could", "know", "said", "see", "door", "phyllis", "people", "woman", "one", "back", "something", "macon", "well", "truck", "take", "two", "felt", "thing", "way", "going", "u", "thought"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/NisforNoose-indexsplit009html

---


Unknown
EIGHTI scrambled to my feet and followed her down the hall. Behind us, I could hear Selma chatting with someone on the phone. When we reached the front door, Phyllis opened it and moved out onto the porch. I hesitated and then joined her, stepping to one side as she pulled the door shut behind us. The cold hit like a blast. The sky had turned hazy, with heavy gray clouds sliding down the mountains in the distance. I crossed my arms and kept my feet close together, trying to preserve body heat against the onslaught of nippy weather.The outfit Phyllis sported was thin cotton and looked more appropriate for a summer barbecue. She wore abbreviated tennis socks, little pom-poms resting on the backs of her walking shoes. No coat or jacket. She spoke in a low tone as if Selma might be hovering on the far side of the door. “There’s something I thought I better mention while I had the chance.”“Aren’t you cold?” I asked. There she stood with her bare arms in a skimpy cotton blouse, her skirt blowing against her bare legs. I was wearing a long-sleeved turtleneck and jeans and I was still on the verge of lockjaw trying to keep my teeth from chattering.She made a careless gesture, brushing aside the bitter chill. “I’m used to it. Doesn’t bother me. This will only take a minute. I should have said something sooner, but I haven’t had the chance.”For mid-March, her face seemed remarkably tanned. I had to guess it was from skiing, given that the rest of her was pale. Her face was nicely creased, lines radiating from the corners of her eyes, lines bracketing her mouth. Her nose was long and straight, her teeth very white and even. She looked like the perfect person to have with you when you were down; pleasant and capable without being too earnest.Out in the yard, a stiff breeze ruffled through the dead grass. I clamped my mouth shut, trying to keep from whining like a dog. I could feel my eyes water from the cold. Soon my nose would start running and me with no hankie. I sniffed, trying to postpone the moment I’d have to use my shirt sleeve. I focused on Phyllis, already chatting away.“You know Macon joined the sheriff’s department because of Tom. The two fellows were always close despite the difference in their ages-and of course when Tom married Selma, we wished him all the best.”“Aren’t there any other jobs in this town? Everyone I’ve met is in law enforcement.”Phyllis smiled. “We all know each other. We tend to hang out together, like a social club.”“I guess so,” I said, mentally begging her to hurry since I was freezing my ass off.“Tom was a wonderful man. I think you’ll find that out when you start asking around.”“So everybody says. In fact, most people seem to prefer him to her,” I said.“Oh, Selma has her good points. Not everybody likes her, but she’s all right. I wouldn’t say we’re friends... in fact, we’re not even that close, which may seem surprising given the fact we live two doors away... but you can see somebody’s weaknesses and still like them for their better qualities.”“Absolutely,” I said. This was hardly an endorsement, but I understood what she was saying. I felt like making that rolling hand gesture that says Come on, come on.“Selma’d been complaining to me for months about Tom. I guess it’s the same thing she told you. Well, in September... this was about six months ago... Tom and Macon went to a gun show in Los Angeles and I tagged along. Selma wasn’t really interested-she had some big event that weekend-so she didn’t come with us. Anyway, I happened to see Tom with this woman and I remember thinking, uh oh. Know what I mean? Just something about the way they had their heads bent together didn’t look right to me. Let’s put it this way. This gal was interested. I could tell by the way she looked at him.”I felt a flash of irritation. I couldn’t believe she was telling me this. “Phyllis, I wish you’d mentioned this before now. I’ve been in there slogging through that bullshit and what I hear you saying is that Tom’s ‘problem’ didn’t have anything to do with paperwork.”“Well, that’s just it. I don’t really know. I asked Macon about the woman and he said she was a sheriff’s investigator over on the coast. Perdido, I believe, thoughI could be wrong about that. Anyway, Macon said he’d seen her with Tom on a couple of occasions. He told me to keep my mouth shut and that’s what I did, but I felt awful. Selma was planning this big anniversary party at the country club and I kept thinking if Tom was... well, you know... if he was involved with someone, Selma was going to end up looking like a fool. Honestly, what’s humiliating when your husband’s having an affair is realizing everybody in the whole town knows about it but you. I don’t know if you’ve ever had the experience yourself-““So you told her,” I suggested, trying to jump her like a game of checkers. I did conclude from her comments that Macon had subjected her to the very humiliations she was so worried about for Selma.Phyllis made a face. “Well, no, I didn’t. I never worked up my nerve. I hate to defy Macon because he turns into such a bear, but I was debating with myself. I adored Tom and I couldn’t decide how much I owed Selma as a sister-in-law. I mean, sometimes friendship takes precedence regardless. On the other hand, you don’t always do someone a favor telling something like that. In some ways, it’s hostile. That’s just the way I see it. At any rate, the next thing I knew, Tom had passed away and Selma was beside herself. I’ve felt terrible ever since. If I’d told her what I suspected, she could have confronted him right then and put a stop to it.”“You know for a fact he was having an affair?”“Well, no. That’s the point. I thought Selma should be warned, but I didn’t have any proof. That’s why I was so reluctant to speak up. Macon felt like it was none of our business, and with him breathing down my neck I was caught between a rock and hard place.”“Why tell me now?”“This was the first opportunity I had. When I was listening to you in there, I realized how frustrating this must be from your perspective. I mean, you might turn up evidence if you knew where to look. If he was misbehaving, so to speak-he had to leave some trace, unless he’s smarter than most men.”The front door burst open and Selma popped her head out. “There you are. I thought the two of you’d gone off and left me. What’s this all about?”“We were just jawing,” Phyllis said, without missing a beat. “I was on my way home and she was nice enough to walk me out.”“Would you look at her? She’s frozen. Let the poor thing come in here and get thawed out, for Pete’s sake!”Gratefully, I scurried into the house while the two of them discussed another work session the next morning. I headed for the kitchen where I washed my hands. I should have considered another woman in the mix. It might explain why Tom’s buddies were being so protective of him. It might also explain the six 805 calls to the unidentified woman whose message I’d picked up from her answering machine.A few minutes later, Selma came in, agitated. “Well, if that doesn’t take the cake. I cannot believe it. She was just telling me about a dinner party coming up in the neighborhood, but have I been invited? Of course not,” she was saying. “Now I’m a widow, I’ve been dropped like a hot potato. I know Tom’s friends... the fellows... would include me, but you know how women are; they feel threatened at the thought of a single woman on the loose. When Tom was alive, we were part of a crowd that went everywhere. Cocktail parties, dinners, dances at the club. We were always included in the social scene, but in the weeks since he died I haven’t left the house. The first couple of days, of course, everybody pitched in. Casseroles and promises. That’s how I think of it. Now, I sit here night after night and the phone hardly rings except for things like this. Scut work, I call it. Good old Selma’s always up for a committee. I do and I do. I really knock myself out and what’s the point? The women are all too happy to pass off responsibility. Saves them the effort, if you know what I mean.”“But Selma, it’s only been six weeks. Maybe people are trying to show their respects, giving you time to grieve.”“I’m sure that’s their version,” she said tartly.I made some reply, hoping to get her off the subject. Her view was distorted and I wondered what would happen if she could see herself as others saw her. It was her very grandiosity that offended, not her insecurities. Selma seemed to be unaware of how transparent she was, oblivious to the disdain with which she was regarded for her snobbery.She seemed to shake off her mood. “Enough of this pity party. It won’t change anything. Can I fix you a bite of lunch? I’m heating some soup and I can make us some grilled cheese sandwiches.”“Sounds great,” I said. Already I felt guilty accepting her hospitality when I’d sat around listening to other people’s withering assessments. I’d told myself it was part of the information I was gathering, but I could have protested the venom with which such opinions had been delivered. By now familiar with the kitchen, I opened the cupboard door and took down soup bowls and plates. “Will Brant be joining us?”“I doubt it. He’s still in his room, probably dead to the world. He goes to the gym three days a week, so he likes to sleep in on the mornings between. Let me go check.” She disappeared briefly and returned shaking her head. “He’ll be right out,” she said. “Why don’t you tell me what you’ve found out so far.”I took out an extra plate and bowl, then opened the silverware drawer and took out soup spoons. While she heated the soup and grilled sandwiches, I filled her in on activities to date, giving her a verbal report of where I’d been and who I’d talked to. My efforts sounded feeble in the telling. Because of what Phyllis had told me, I now had a new avenue to explore, but I was unwilling to mention it when I was only dealing with suspicions. Selma had never even suggested the possibility of another woman, and I wasn’t going to introduce the subject unless I found some reason to do so.Brant appeared just as we were sitting down to eat. He was wearing jeans and cowboy boots, his snug white T-shirt emphasizing the effectiveness of his workouts. Selma ladled soup into bowls and cut the sandwiches in half, putting one on each plate.We began to eat in the kind of silence I found mildly unsettling. “What made you decide to become a paramedic?” I asked.I had caught Brant with his mouth full. He smiled, embarrassed, signaling the delay while he tucked half the food in his cheek. “I had a couple of friends in the fire department so I took a six-month course. Bandages and driving. I think Tom was hoping I’d join the sheriff’s department, but I couldn’t see myself doing that. I enjoy what I do. You know, it’s always something.”I nodded, still eating. “Is the job what you expected?”“Sure. Only more fun,” he said.I might have asked him more, but I could see him glance at his watch. He wolfed down the last of his sandwich and crumpled his paper napkin. He pushed back from the table, picking up his half-empty bowl and his plate. He stood at the sink and drank a few mouthfuls of soup before he rinsed his bowl and set it in the dishwasher.Selma gestured. “I’ll get that.”“I got it,” he said as he added his sandwich plate. I heard his spoon chink in the silverware container just before he snapped the dishwasher shut. He gave his mother’s cheek a quick buss. “Will you be here a while?”“I’ve got a meeting at the church. What about you?”“I think I’ll drive on down to Independence and see Sherry”“Will you be back tonight?”“I wouldn’t count on it,” he said.“You drive carefully.”“Twenty-five whole miles. I think I can handle it.” He snagged the four remaining cookies from the plate, placing one in his mouth with a grin. “Better make more cookies. This was a short batch,” he said. “See you later.”Selma left the house after lunch so I didn’t have the chance to broach the subject that was beginning to tug at me-a quick trip to Santa Teresa to pick up my car. I’d had the rental for over three weeks and the cost was mounting daily. I’d never imagined an extended stay in Nota Lake so my current wardrobe was limited. I longed to sleep in my own bed even for one night. The issue of the female sheriff’s investigator I could dig into once I got home. Anything else of interest here could wait ‘til I got back to Nota Lake.Meanwhile, it was time to have a chat with the Nota Lake Police Department. Given the new lead, I couldn’t see how last night’s incident could be tied to my investigation, but I thought I should do the smart thing and report it anyway. I left a note for Selma, shrugged on my leather jacket, took my shoulder bag, and headed off.The Nota Lake Police Department was housed in a plain one-story building with a stucco exterior, a granite entryway, and two wide granite steps. The windows and the plate glass door were framed in aluminum. An arrow under a stick figure in a wheelchair indicated an accessible entrance somewhere to the left. The bushes along the front had been trimmed to window height and from the flagpole both the American and the State of California flags were snapping in the breeze. Six radio antennae had been erected on the roof like a series of upright fishing poles. As with the Nota Lake Fire Department, located next door, this was generic architecture, a strictly functional facility. No tax dollars had been needlessly squandered here.The interior was consistent with its no-frills decor, strongly reminiscent of the sheriff’s headquarters two doors down: a lowered ceiling of fluorescent panels and acoustical tile, metal file cabinets, wood-grained laminate counters. On the desks, I could see the backs of the two computer monitors and attendant CPUs from which countless electrical cords sprouted like airborne roots.The desk officer was M. Corbet, a fellow in his forties with a smooth round face, thinning hair, and a tendency to wheeze. “Thiss iss asthma in case you’re thinking I’m contagious,” he said. “Cold air gets to me and this dry heat doesn’t help. Excuse me a second.” He had a small inhaler that he placed in his lips, sucking deeply of the mist that would open up his bronchi. He set the inhaler aside with a shake of his head. “Thiss iss the damndest thing. Never had a problem in my life until a couple years back. Turns out I’m allergic to house dust, animal hair, pollen, and mold. What’s a fella supposed to do? Quit breathing altogether is the only cure I know.”“That’s a tough one,” I said.“Doctor tells me it’s more and more people developing allergies. Says he has this one patient reacts to inside air. Synthetics, chemicals, microbes coming through the heating vents. Poor woman has to tote around an oxygen trolley everywhere she goes. Passes out and falls down the minute she encounters any alien pathogens. Thankfully, I’m not yet as bad off as her, though the chief had to take me off active duty and put me on desk. Anyway, that’s my story. Now what can I help you with?”I gave him my business card, hoping to establish my credibility before I launched into a description of the events involving the driver of the panel truck. Officer Corbet was polite, but I could tell just by looking at him that the issue of someone in a ski mask staring at me real hard wasn’t going to qualify as a major case for the Crimes Against Persons unit, which probably consisted solely of him. Lungs awhistle, he took my report, printing the particulars in block letters on the proper form. He placed his hands on the counter, tapping with his fingers as if he was playing a little tune. “I do know someone with a truck like that.”“You do?” I said, surprised.“Yes ma’am. Sounds like Ercell Riccardi. He lives right around the corner about three doors down. Keeps his truck parked in the drive. I’m surprised you didn’t see it on your way over here.”“I didn’t come from that direction. I turned right off of Main.”“Well, you might want to have a look. Ercell leaves it sit out any time it’s not in use.”“With keys in the ignition?”“Yes ma’am. It’s not like Nota Lake is the auto-theft capital of the world. I think he started doing it maybe five, six years back. We had us a rash of break-ins, bunch of kids busting into cars, smashing windows, taking tape decks, going joyriding. Ercell got tired of replacing the stereo so he ‘give up and give in’ is how he puts it. Last time his truck was broke into he didn’t even bother to file a claim. Said it was driving his rates up and to hell with the whole thing. Now he leaves the truck open, keys in the ignition, and a note on the dash saying, ‘Please put back in the drive when you’re done.“So people take his truck any time they like?”“Doesn’t happen that often. Occasionally, somebody borrows it, but they always put it back. It’s a point of honor with folks and Ercell’s a lot happier.”The telephone began to ring and Officer Corbet straightened up. “Anyway, if you think the truck was Ercell’s, just give us a call and we’ll talk to him. It’s not something he’d do, but anybody could have hopped in his vehicle and followed you.”“I’ll take a look.”Out on the street again, I shoved my hands in my jacket pockets and headed for the corner. As soon as I turned onto Lone Star, I saw the black panel truck. I approached it with caution, wondering if there were any way I could link this truck to the one I’d seen. I circled the vehicle, leaning close to the headlights. Impossible in daylight to see if the beams were askew. I moved around to the rear and ran a finger across the license plate, scrutinizing the surface where I could see faint traces of adhesive. I stood up and turned to study the house itself. A man was stationed at the window, looking out at me. He stared, scowling. I reversed my steps and returned to my parking spot.When I reached the rental car, Macon Newquist was waiting, his black-and-white vehicle parked behind mine at the curb. He glanced up at me, catching my eye with a smile. “Hi. How are you? I figured this was your car. How’s it going?”I smiled. “Fine. For a minute, I thought you were giving me a ticket.”“Don’t worry about that. In this town we tend to reserve tickets for people passing through.” He crossed his arms and leaned a hip against the side of the rental. “I hope this doesn’t seem out of line, but Phyllis mentioned that business about the gun show. I guess she passed along her opinion about the gal Tom was talking to.I felt my reaction time slow and I calculated my response. Phyllis must have felt guilty about telling me and blabbed the minute she got home. I thought I better cover so I shrugged it aside. “She said something in passing. I really didn’t pay that much attention.”“I didn’t want you to get the wrong impression.”“No problem.”“Because she attached more to it than was warranted.”“Ah.”“Don’t get me wrong. You don’t know the ladies in this town. Nothing escapes their notice and when it turns out to be nothing, they make it into something else. The woman Tom was talking to, that was strictly professional.”“Not surprising. Everybody tells me he was good at his job. You know her name?”“I don’t. I never heard it myself. She’s a sheriff’s investigator. I do know that much because I asked him about it later.”“You happen to know what county?”He scratched at his chin. “Not offhand. Could be Kern, San Benito, I forget what he said. I could see Phyllis put the hairy eye-ball on the two of them and I pled. Last thing Selma needs is t him. All she has is her memories what’s she got left?”“I couldn’t agree more. Trust me, I’d never be irresponsible about something like that.”“That’s good. I’m glad to hear that. People don’t like the notion you’re using up Tom’s money on a wildgoose chase. So what’s your timetable on this?”“That remains to be seen. If you have any ideas, I hope you’ll let me know.”Macon shook his head. “I wish I could help, but I realize I’m the wrong one to ask. I know I offered, but this is one of those circumstances where I’m not going to be objective. People admired Tom and I’m not just saying that because I admired him myself. If there was something tacky in his life... well, people aren’t going to want to know that about him. You take somebody like Margaret’s husband. I believe you talked to him at Tiny’s. Hatch was a protégé of Tom’s, and the other fellow, Wayne, was somebody Tom rescued from a bad foster care situation. See what I mean? You can’t run around asking those fellows what Tom was like. They don’t take to it that well. They’ll be polite, but it’s not going to sit right.”“I appreciate the warning.”“I wouldn’t call it a warning. I don’t want to give you the wrong impression. It’s just human nature to want to protect the people we care about. All I’m saying is, let’s not be hasty and cause trouble for no reason.”“I wouldn’t dream of it.”
