---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_012.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["like", "would", "mickey", "could", "said", "number", "probably", "one", "day", "last", "u", "way", "get", "mark", "know", "sure", "first", "light", "call", "well", "even", "phone", "pay", "made", "security"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit012html

---


Unknown
ELEVENOn the way home, I stopped off at McDonald’s and bought myself a QP with cheese, an order of fries, and a medium Coke. Once I’d picked Dorothy’s hair off my lip, I steered with one hand while I munched with the other, all the time moaning with pleasure. It’s pitiful to have a life in which junk food is awarded the same high status as sex. Then again, I tend to get a lot more of the one than I do of the other. I was back in Santa Teresa by four-fifteen. The only message on my machine was from Mark Bethel, who’d finally returned my Monday-afternoon call at eleven-thirty Wednesday morning.I dialed his number, taking a moment to unzip my jeans and remove Mickey’s mail from my underpants. Naturally, Mark was out, so I ended up talking to Judy. “You almost caught him. He left fifteen minutes ago. “Shoot. Well, I’m sorry I missed him. I just got back from Los Angeles. I have news about Mickey and I may need his help. I’m in for the afternoon. If he has a chance to call, I’d love to talk to him.”“I’m afraid he’s gone for the day, Kinsey, but if you like you can catch him at seven tonight at the Lampara,” she said, naming a downtown theater.“Doing what?” I asked, though I had a fair idea. Mark Bethel was one of fourteen Republican candidates who’d be battling it out in the primary coming up on June, a scant twelve days off. I’d heard four of them had been invited to debate the issues at an event being sponsored by the League for Fair Government.“This is a public debate: Robert Naylor, Mike Antonovich, Bobbi Fiedler, and Mark, talking about election issues.”“Sounds hot,” I said, thinking, Who’s kidding who? The California Secretary of State, March Fong Eu, was predicting the lowest voter turnout in forty-six years. Of the candidates Judy’d mentioned, only Mike Antonovich, the conservative L. A. County supervisor, had even a slim chance at winning. Naylor was an assemblyman from Menlo Park, the only Northern Californian in the race until Ed Zschau had stepped in. Zschau was the front-runner. Rumor had it that the San Diego Union, the San Francisco Chronicle, the San Francisco Examiner, and the Contra Costa Times were all coming out in support of him. Meanwhile, Bobbi Fiedler, a San Fernando Valley congresswoman and a seasoned politician, had had the rug pulled out from under her when a grand jury indicted her for allegedly bribing another candidate into leaving the race. The charges turned out to be groundless and had been dismissed, but her supporters had lost enthusiasm and she was having trouble recovering her momentum. As for Mark, this was his second fling at a statewide election, and he was busy pouring Laddie’s money into TV spots in which he touted himself for running such a clean campaign. Like anyone gave a shit. The notion of sitting through some droning political debate was enough to put me in a coma of my own.Meanwhile, Judy was saying, “Mark’s been preparing for days, mostly on Prop Fifty-one. That’s the Deep Pockets Initiative.”“Right.”“Also Props Forty-two and Forty-eight. He feels pretty strongly about those.”I said, “Hey, who wouldn’t?” I pushed some papers around my desk, uncovering the sample ballot under the local paper and a pile of mail. Proposition 48 would put a lid on ex-officials’ pensions. Yawn, snore. Prop 4 would authorize the state to issue $850 million in bonds to continue the Cal-Vet farm and home loan program. “I didn’t know Mark was a veteran,” I said, making conversation.“Oh, sure, he enlisted in the army right after his college graduation. I’ll send you a copy of his CV.”“You don’t have to do that,” I said.“It’s no trouble. I have a bunch of ’em going out in the mail. You know, he won a Purple Heart.”“Really, I had no idea.”While Judy nattered on, I found the comic section and read Rex Morgan, M. D., which was at least as interesting. Judy interrupted herself, saying, “Shoot. There goes my other phone. I better catch that in case it’s him.”“No problem.”As soon as I hung up, I propped my feet up on my desk and turned my attention to the mail I’d snitched.I picked up my letter opener and slit the envelopes. The bank statements showed regular paycheck deposits until late February, then nothing until late March, when he began to make small deposits at bi-weekly intervals. Unemployment benefits. I couldn’t remember how that worked. There was probably a waiting period during which claims were processed and approved. In any event, the money he was depositing wasn’t sufficient to cover his monthly expenses, and he was having to supplement the total out of his savings account. The current balance there was roughly $1,500. I’d found cash hidden on the premises, but no sign of his passbook. It would be nice to have that. I was surprised I hadn’t come across it in my initial search. The monthly statements would have to do.By comparing the activity in his savings and checking accounts, I could see the money jump from one to the other and then slide on out the door. Canceled checks indicated that he’d continued to pay as many bills as he could. His rent was $850 a month, which had last been paid March 1, according to the canceled check. Through the last half of February and the first three weeks of March, there were three checks made out to cash totaling $1,800. That seemed odd, given his financial difficulties, which were serious enough without pissing away his cash. The police probably had the April statement, so there was no way for me to tell if he’d paid rent on the first or not. My guess was that sometime in here he’d let his storage fees become delinquent.By April, he was already in arrears on his telephone bill, and his service must have been cut before he had a chance to catch up. The cash he’d hidden probably represented a last resort, monies he was reluctant to spend unless his situation became desperate. Maybe his intent was to disappear, once all his other funds were depleted.On the twenty-fifth of March, there was a one-time deposit of $900. I decided that was probably from the sale of his car. A couple of days later, on the twenty-seventh, there was a modest deposit of $200, which allowed him to pay his gas and electric bills. I did note that the $200 appeared the very day the call was made from his apartment to my machine. Someone paid him to use the phone? That would be weird. At any rate, he probably figured he could stall eviction for another month or two, at which point-what? He’d take his cash and phony documents and leave the state? Something about this gnawed at me. Mickey was a fanatic about savings. It was his contention that everyone should have a good six months’ worth of income in the bank, or under the mattress, whichever seemed safer. He was such a nut on the subject, I’d made it a practice myself since then. He had to have another savings account somewhere. Had he put the money in a CD or a pension fund at his job? I wasn’t even sure why he’d been fired. Was he drunk on duty? I sat and thought about that and then called directory assistance in Los Angeles and got the number for Pacific Coast Security in Culver City. I figured I had sufficient information to fake my way through. I knew his date of birth and his current address. His social security number would have been an asset, but all I remembered of it was the last four digits: 1776. Mickey always made a point about the numbers being the same as the year the Declaration of Independence was signed.I dialed the number for Pacific Coast Security and listened to the phone ring, trying to figure out what I was going to say, surely not the truth in this case. When the call was picked up, I asked for Personnel. The woman who answered sounded like she was already halfway home for the day. It was close to five by now and she was probably in the process of clearing her desk. “This is Personnel. Mrs. Bird,” she said.“Oh, hi. This is Mrs. Weston in the billing department at UCLA Medical Center. We’re calling with regard to a patient who’s been admitted to ICU. We understand he’s employed by Pacific Coast Security, and we’re wondering if you can verify his insurance coverage.”“Certainly,” she said. “The employee’s name?”“Last name Magruder. That’s M-A-G-R-U-D-E-R. First name, Mickey. You may have him listed as Michael. Middle initial B. Home address 805 Sepulveda Boulevard; date of birth, sixteen September 1933. Admitted through emergency on May fourteenth. We don’t have a complete social security number, but we’d love to pick that up from you.”I could hear the woman breathing in my ear. “We heard about that. The poor man. Unfortunately, like I told the detectives, Mr. Magruder no longer works for us. He was terminated as of February twenty-eighth.”“Terminated as in fired?”“That’s right.”“Well, for heaven’s sake. What for?”She paused. “I’m not at liberty to discuss that, but it had to do with d-r-i-n-k-i-n-g.”“That’s too bad. What about his medical insurance? Is there any possibility his coverage was extended?”“Not according to our records.”“Well, that’s odd. He had an insurance card in his wallet when he was brought in, and we were under the impression his coverage was current. Is he employed by any other company in the area?”“I doubt it. We haven’t been asked for references.”“What about Unemployment. Has he applied for benefits? Because he may qualify for medical under SDI.” Yeah, right, SDI. Like we were all so casual about State Disability Insurance we didn’t even need to spell it out.“I really can’t answer that. You’d have to check with them.”“What about money in his pension fund? Did he have automatic debits to his savings out of each paycheck?”“I don’t see where that’s relevant,” she said. She was beginning to sound uneasy, probably wondering if this was a ruse of some kind.“You would if you saw the way his bill was mounting up,” I said tartly.“I’m afraid I can’t discuss it. Especially with the police involved. They made a big point of that. We’re not supposed to talk to anyone about anything when it comes to him.”“Same here. We’ve been asked to notify Detective Aldo if anyone even asks for his room.”“Really? They didn’t say anything like that to us. Maybe because he hadn’t worked here for so long.”“Consider yourself lucky. We’re on red alert. Did you know Mr. Magruder personally?”“Sure. The company’s not all that big.”“You must feel terrible.”“I do. He’s a real sweet guy. I can’t imagine why anyone would want to do that to him.”“Awful,” I said. “What about his social security number? We have the last four digits, 1776, but the emergency room clerk couldn’t understand what he was saying so she missed the first portion. All I need are the first five digits for our records. The director’s a real stickler.”She seemed startled. “He was conscious?”“Oh. Well, I don’t know, now you mention it. He must have been, at least briefly. How else would we have this much?” I sensed her debate. “It’s in his best interests,” I added piously.“Just a minute.” I heard her clicking her computer keys, and after a moment she read off the first five digits.I made a note. “Thanks. You’re a doll. I appreciate that.”There was a pause, and then her curiosity got the better of her. “How’s he doing?”“I’m sorry, but I’m not allowed to divulge that information. You’d have to ask the medical staff. I’m sure you can appreciate the confidentiality of these matters, especially here at UCLA.”“Of course. Absolutely. Well, I hope he’s okay. Tell him Ingrid said hi.”“I’ll pass the word.”Once she’d hung up, I opened my desk drawer and took out a fresh pack of lined index cards. Time for clerical work. I began jotting down notes, writing as fast as I could, one item per card, piling them up as I went. I had a lot of catching up to do, days of accumulated questions. I knew some of the answers, but most of the lines I was forced to leave blank. I used to imagine I could hold it all in my head, but memory has a way of pruning and deleting, eliminating anything that doesn’t seem relevant at the moment. Later, it’s the odd unrelated detail that sometimes makes the puzzle parts rearrange themselves like magic. The very act of taking pen to paper somehow gooses the brain into making the leap. It doesn’t always happen in the moment, but without the concrete notation, the data disappear.I checked my watch. It was 6:05 and I was so cockeyed with weariness my clothes had begun to hurt. I turned the ringer off the phone, went up the spiral stairs, stripped, kicked my shoes off, wrapped myself in a quilt, and slept.I woke at 9:15 P.M., though it felt like midnight. I sat up in bed, yawning, and tried to get my bearings. I felt weighted with weariness. I pushed the covers aside and went over to the railing. Below, on my desk, I could see the light on my answering machine blinking merrily. Shit. If not for that, I’d have crawled back in bed and slept through till morning.I pulled a robe on and picked my way down the stairs barefoot. I pressed PLAY and listened to a message from Cordia Hatfield, the manager of Mickey’s building. “Kinsey, I wonder if you could give us a call when you come in. There’s something we think you should be aware of.”She’d called at 8:45, so I felt it was probably safe to return the call. I dialed the number, and Cordia picked up before I’d even heard the phone ring once. “Hello?”“Cordia, is that you? This is Kinsey Millhone up in Santa Teresa. The phone didn’t even ring.”“Well, it did down here. Listen, dear, the reason I called is that detective stopped by shortly after you left. He spent quite a bit of time up Two-H, and when he finished he came right here. He seemed perturbed, and he asked if anyone had gone in. We played dumb. He was quite insistent, but neither of us breathed a word.”“Ah. Was this the tall dark guy, Detective Aldo?”“That’s the one. We’re old. What do we know, with all our brain cells gone? We didn’t lie to him exactly, but I’m afraid we did skirt the truth a bit. I told him I was perfectly capable of taking in rent checks and calling the plumber if a toilet backed up, but I don’t go skulking around, spying on the tenants. What they do is their business. Then I showed him my foot and told him, ‘With this bunion, I’m lucky to get around. I can’t be tromping up and down.’ He changed the subject after that.”“What set him off?”“He said something was missing, though he wouldn’t say what. He had a boxload of items with him and told me he’d removed the crime tape. ‘For all the good it did,’ is how he put it. He was sour on the subject, I can tell you that.”“Thanks for the warning.”“You’re entirely welcome. Main reason I called is you’re free to enter the apartment, but it won’t be long. The owners are pressing to get Mr. Magruder out of there. I guess the detective notified the management company, so they know he’s in a coma. They snapped right to it, taking advantage of his condition. Shame on them. Anyway, if you’re interested in renting, you should take a look.”“I may do that. I’d like that. When would be good?”“The sooner the better. You’re only two hours away.“You’re talking about tonight?”“I think you’d be smart. The owners have already served him with a three-day pay or quit, so technically the sheriff could have a new lock on the door by tomorrow morning.”“Can’t we do something to prevent that?”“Not as far as I know.”“What if I pay what he owes, plus the next month’s rent? Wouldn’t that cancel the action?”“I doubt it. Once a tenant starts paying late or doesn’t pay at all, the owners would just as soon clear the place out and get someone else in.”I thought about the drive, rolling my eyes with dismay. “I wish I’d known this when I was down there earlier.”“If you’re coming, you best hurry. It’s entirely up to you, of course.”“Cordia, it’s already close to nine-thirty. If I come down tonight, I’d still have to pack and get gas, which means I probably won’t arrive before midnight.” I didn’t mention I was close to naked.“That’s not late for us. Bel and I only need four hours’ sleep, so we’re up till all hours. The advantage in coming now is you’d have all the time you want and not a soul to disturb you.”“Mickey’s neighbors won’t notice if his lights are on?”“Nobody pays attention. Most of these folk work so they’re usually in bed by ten. And if it gets too late, you can always spend the night with us. We have the only three-bedroom unit in the building. The guest room is really Dort’s, but I’m sure she wouldn’t mind the company. We had quite a little chat about you after you left.”I let go of my resistance and took a deep breath. “All right. I’ll do it. See you in a bit.”I changed into my jeans, turtleneck, and tennis shoes, which were light and silent, good for late-night work. At least I’d been inside Mickey’s place and knew what to expect. I still had the key I’d removed from his back door, but I intended to take my pick in case the need arose. Since I had no intention of driving home in the wee hours of the morning, I got out my duffel and threw in the oversized T-shirt I wear as a nightie. I routinely carry a toothbrush, toothpaste, and fresh underwear in the bottom of my shoulder bag. The remainder of the space in the duffel I filled with tools: rubber gloves, my battery-operated pick, drill and drill bits, screwdriver, lightbulbs, pliers, needle-nose pliers, magnifying glass, and dental mirror, along with two flashlights, one standard and one on a long stem that could be angled for viewing those hard-to-reach places Mickey loved so much. I suspected I’d uncovered the majority of his hiding places, but I didn’t want to take the chance, especially since this represented my last opportunity to snoop. I also took a second canvas duffel bag, folded and placed inside the first. I now planned to confiscate Mickey’s contraband and hold it at my place until he could let me know what he wanted done with it.I stopped at a service station to have my gas tank filled. While the guy cleaned the windshield and checked the oil, I popped into the “refreshment center” and bought myself a big nasty sandwich-cheese and mystery meat-and a large Styrofoam container of coffee that smelled only faintly scorched. I bought a separate carton of milk, poured out some of the black liquid, and refilled the cup to the brim with milk, then added two paper packets of sugar just to make sure my brain would be properly abuzz.I was on my way by ten past ten, the VW windows rolled down, the engine whining with the effort of maintaining a constant 60 mph. I ate as I drove and somehow avoided spilling coffee down my front. There were a surprising number of cars on the road, interspersed with semis and Rvs, all of us traveling at breakneck speeds. The sense of urgency was multiplied by the darkness that encompassed us, headlights and taillights forming ever-shifting patterns. In the stretch between Santa Teresa and Olvidado, the moon sat above the water like an alabaster globe resting on a pyramid of light. Along the shoreline, the waves were like loosely churning pearls tumbling through the surf. The ancient scent of seaweed drifted in the night air like a mist. Seaside communities appeared and disappeared as the miles accumulated. Hillsides, visible in the distance by day, were reduced to pinpoints of light that wound along the slopes.I crested the Camarillo grade and coasted down the far side into the westernmost perimeter of the San Fernando Valley. There were no stars in sight. The Los Angeles light pollution gave the night sky a ghostly illumination, like an aurora borealis underlaid by smog. I cut south on the 405 as far as National, took the off-ramp and headed east. At Sepulveda, I hung a left and slowed, finally spotting Mickey’s building in the unfamiliar night landscape. I parked out on the street, taking my shoulder bag and duffel. I locked the car behind me and prayed that the chassis, the wheels, and the engine wouldn’t be dismantled and gone by morning.The lights were on in the Hatfields’ kitchen. I tapped at the door, and Cordia let me in. Bel was sleeping upright in her chair, so Cordia and I had a whispered conversation while she showed me the guest room with its adjoining bath. Dorothy followed like a puppy-cat, making sure she was in the center of any ongoing discussion. I had to pause more than once to rub behind her ears. I tossed my shoulder bag on the bed. Dorothy promptly claimed ownership, using all twenty pounds to squish and flatten the contents. The last I saw, she had settled like a chicken on a nestful of eggs.
