---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_016.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["could", "said", "call", "number", "mickey", "know", "name", "phone", "back", "one", "get", "going", "tell", "might", "think", "like", "say", "may", "made", "anything", "detective", "still", "got", "hear", "right"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit016html

---


Unknown
FIFTEENFriday morning, I woke up at 5:58, feeling logy and out of sorts. Every bone in my body was begging for more sleep, but I pushed aside the covers and reached for my sweats. I brushed my teeth and ran a comb through my hair, which was sticking out in all directions as though electrified. I paused near the gate and did an obligatory stretch. I started with a fast walk and then broke into a trot when I reached the beachfront park that runs along Cabana Boulevard.The morning sky was dense with cloud cover, the air hazy. Without the full range of sunlight, all the warm reds and yellows had been leached from the landscape, leaving a muted palette of cool tones: blues, grays, taupe, dun, smoky green. The breeze blowing off the beach smelled of wharf pilings and seaweed. In the course of my run, I could feel the interior fog begin to lift. Intense exercise is the only legal high I know, except for love, of course. Whatever your inner state, all you have to do is run, walk, ride a bike, ski, lift weights, and suddenly your optimism’s back and life seems good again.Once recovered from my run, I drove over to the gym, which is seldom crowded at that hour, the prework fanatics having already come and gone. The gym itself is spartan, painted gunmetal gray, with industrial carpeting the same color as the asphalt in the parking lot outside. There are huge plate-glass mirrors on the walls. The air smells of rubber and sweaty armpits. The prime patrons are men in various stages of physical fitness. The women who show up tend to fall into two categories: the extremely lean fitness fiends, who trash themselves daily, and the softer women who arrive after any food-dominated holiday. The latter never last, but good for them anyway. Better to make some effort than do nothing for life. I fell somewhere between.I started with leg extensions and leg curls, muscles burning as I worked. Abs, lower back, on to the pec deck and chest press, then on to shoulders and arms. Early in a workout, the sheer number of body parts multiplied by sets times the number of repetitions is daunting, but the process is curiously engrossing, pain being what it is. Suddenly I found myself laboring at the last two machines, alternating biceps and triceps. Then I was out the door again, sweaty and exhilarated. Sometimes I nearly wrench my arm from its socket patting myself on the back.Home again, I turned on the automatic coffeepot, made the bed, showered, dressed, and ate a bowl of cereal with skim milk. Then I sat with my coffee and read the local paper. Usually, as the day wears on, my flirtation with good health is overrun by my tendency to self-abuse, especially when it comes to junk food. Fat grams are my downfall, anything with salt, additives, cholesterol, nitrates. Breaded and deep-fried or sautéed in butter, smothered in cheese, slathered with mayonnaise, dripping with meat juices-what foodstuff couldn’t be improved by proper preparation? By the time I finished reading the paper, I was nearly dizzy with hunger and had to suck down more coffee to dampen my appetite. After that, all it took was a big gob of crunchy peanut butter I licked from the spoon while I settled at my desk. I’d decided to skip the office as I’d dutifully caught up with paperwork the day before.I placed Detective Aldo’s business card on the desk in front of me and put a call through to Mark Bethel. I’d actually given up hope of ever speaking to him in person. Sure enough, he’d popped down to Los Angeles for a campaign appearance. I told Judy about Mickey and she went through the usual litany, expressing concern, shock, and dismay at life’s uncertainties.“Can Mark do anything to help?” she asked.“That’s why I called. Would you ask him if he’d talk to Detective Aldo and find out what’s going on? They’re not going to tell me, but they might talk to him since he’s Mickey’s attorney, or at least he was.”“I’m sure he’d do that. Do you have a number?”I recited the number and gave her Detective Felix Claas’s name as well. I also gave her Mickey’s address in Culver City.She said, “I’m making a note. He should be calling when he’s finished. Maybe he can touch base with Detective Aldo while he’s still in Los Angeles.”“Thanks. That’d be great.”“Is that it?”“Just one more thing. Can you ask Mark what’s going to happen to Mickey’s bills? I’m sure they’re piling up, and I hate to see his credit get any worse than it is.”“Got it. I’ll ask. He’ll think of something, I’m sure. I’ll have him call you when he gets in.”“No need for that unless he has a question. just let him know what we talked about and he can take it from there.”I sat at my desk, wondering what to do next. Once more, I hauled out the assorted items I’d lifted from Mickey’s and studied them one by one. Phone bill, the Delta Airlines ticket envelope, receipts from the Honky-Tonk, savings passbooks, phony documents. Emmett Vanover, Delbert Amburgey, Clyde Byler, all with trumped-up personal data and a photo of Mickey’s face plastered in the relevant spots. I went back to the plane ticket, which was issued in the name Magruder. The flight coupons were missing, I assumed, used for the trip, but the passenger receipt and itinerary were still in the ticket envelope. This was an expensive round trip for a guy with no job. What was the relevance, if any? The trip to Louisville might have been personal. Hard to know about that, since we hadn’t talked in years. I laid the ticket on the desk beside the other items, lining them up in various configurations as though a story could be fabricated from the proper sequence of events.When I was a kid, my Aunt Gin kept me supplied with activity books. The paper was always cheap, the games and puzzles designed to shut me up temporarily so she could read for an hour without my interrupting. I’d lie on the trailer floor with my big pencil and a box of crayons. Sometimes the instructions would entail the finding and circling of particular words in a gridwork of letters, sometimes a search for specific objects in a convoluted jungle picture. My favorite was dot-to-dot, in which you constructed a picture by connecting consecutively numbered points on the page. Tongue peeking out of the corner of my mouth, I’d laboriously trace the line from number to number until a picture emerged. I got so good at it, I could stare at the spaces between numbers and see the picture without ever setting pencil to paper. This didn’t require much in the way of brains as the outline was usually simple: a teddy bear or a wagon or a baby duck, all dumb. Nonetheless, I can still remember the rush of joy when recognition dawned. Little did I know that at the age of five I was already in training for my later professional life.What I was looking at here was simply a more sophisticated version of dot-to-dot. If I could understand the order in which the items were related, I could probably get some notion of what was going on in Mickey’s life. For now, what I was missing were the links between events. What was he up to in the months before the shooting? The cops had to be pursuing many of these same questions, but it was possible I was in possession of information they lacked, having stolen it. In the rudimentary conscience I seemed to be developing, I knew I could always opt for the Good Citizen’s Award by “sharing” with Detective Aldo. In the main, I don’t hold back where cops are concerned. On the other hand, if I dug a little deeper, I might figure it out for myself, recapturing the thrill of discovery. There’s nothing like the moment when everything finally falls into place. So why give that up when, with just a tiny bit more effort, I could have it all? (These are the sorts of rationalizations Ms. Millhone engages in when failing to do her civic duty.) I hauled up my handbag and began to sift through the contents, coming up with Wary’s phone number on the back of a business card. Maybe Mickey had said something to him about the trip. I picked up the phone and dialed Los Angeles. It was only ten-fifteen. Maybe I could catch him before he went off to breakfast. I had a vision of Wary’s wire-rimmed glasses and his waist-length brown hair. Two rings. Three. When he finally answered, I could tell from his voice he’d been deeply asleep.“Hey, Wary. How’re you? Did I wake you?”“No, no,” he said valiantly. “Who’s this?”“Kinsey in Santa Teresa. “Silence. “Mickey’s ex.“Oh, yeah, yeah. Got it. Sorry I didn’t recognize your voice. How’re you?”“Fine. And you?”“Doing great. What’s up?” I could hear him lock his jaw in the effort to suppress a yawn.“I have a quick question. Did Mickey say anything about the trip he made to Louisville, Kentucky?”“What trip”“This was week before last. He departed May eighth and returned on the twelfth.”“Oh, that. I knew he was gone, but he never said where. Why’d he go?”“How do I know? I was hoping you’d tell me. Given his finances, I’m having trouble understanding why he took off for five days. The plane ticket cost a fortune, and he probably had to add meals and a motel on top of that.”“Can’t help you there. All I know is he went someplace, but he never said why. I didn’t even know he left the state. Dude didn’t like to fly. I’m surprised he’d get on a plane going anywhere.”“Did he talk to anyone else, someone in the building he might have mentioned it to?”“Could have. I doubt it. It’s not like he had buddies he confided in. Say, you know what might help? I just thought of this. Once his phone was disconnected, he used to pop in and borrow mine. Kind of pay-as-you-go but he was always careful to keep square. I can find the numbers, if you want.”I closed my eyes, saying small prayers. “Wary, I’d be indebted to you for life.”“Hey, cool. I’m going to put the phone down and go look on my desk.”I heard a clunk and I was guessing the handset was now resting on his bed table while he padded around, probably bare-assed naked. A full minute passed, and then he picked up the phone again. “You still there?”“Indeed.”“I got the statement right here. They bill on the fifteenth, so this was in yesterday’s mail. I haven’t even opened it yet. I know some calls he made were out of state because he left me ten bucks and said he’d pay the difference later when the bill came in.”“Really. Did you ever hear what was said?”“Nope. I made it a point to leave the room. I figured it was private. You know him. He never explained anything, especially when it came to his work. He was stingy with exposition in the best of circumstances.”“What makes you think this was work?”“His attitude, I guess. Cop mode, I’d call it. You could see it in his body, the way he carried himself. Even half in the bag, he knew his stuff.” I could hear him shuffling papers. Distracted, he said, “I’m still looking. Have you heard anything?”“About Mickey? Not lately. I guess I could call Aldo, but I’m afraid to ask.”“Here we go. Okay. Oh. There was just one. This’s the seventh of May. Lookit here. You’re right. He called Louisville.” He read the number off to me. “Actually, he made two to the same number. The first was quick, less than a minute. The longer one, ten minutes, was shortly afterward.”I was frowning at the phone. “It must have been important to him if he flew out the next day.”“A man of action,” he said. “Listen, I gotta get off the phone and go take a leak, but I’ll be happy to call you back if I think of anything else.”“Thanks, Wary.”Once I hung up, I sat and stared at the phone, trying to “get centered,” as we say in California. Ten-twenty here, that would make it one-twenty in Kentucky. I had no clue who he’d called, so I couldn’t think of a ruse. I’d have to make it up as I went along. I dialed the number.“Louisville Male High School. This is Terry speaking. May I help you?”Male High School? Terry sounded like a student, probably working in the office. I was so nonplused I couldn’t think of anything to say. “Oops. Wrong number.” I put the handset back. Belatedly, my heart thumped. What was this about?I took a couple of deep breaths and dialed again.“Louisville Male High School. This is Terry speaking. May I help you?”“Uh, yes. I wonder if I might speak to the assistant principal?”“Mrs. Magliato? One minute.” Terry put me on hold, and ten seconds later the line was picked up.“Mrs. Magliato May I help you?”“I hope so. My name is Mrs. Hurst from the General Telephone offices in Culver City, California. A call was placed to this number from Culver City on May seventh, and the charges are currently in dispute. The call was billed to last-name Magruder, first name Mickey or Michael. Mr. Magruder indicates that he never made such a call, and we’ve been asked to identify the party called. Can you be of some assistance? We’d appreciate your help.”“What was that name again?”I spelled it out.She said, “Doesn’t sound familiar. Hold on and I’ll ask if anybody else remembers talking to him.”She put me on hold. I listened to a local radio station, but the sound was pitched too low for me to hear what was being said. She came back on the line. “No, I’m sorry. None of us talked to anyone by that name.”“What about the principal? Any possibility he might have taken the call himself?”“For starters, it’s a she and I already asked. The name doesn’t ring a bell.”I thought about the names on the phony documents and pulled them closer. “Uh, what about the names Emmett Vanover, Delbert Amburgey, and Clyde Byler? “I repeated them before she asked, which seemed to piss her off.“I know I didn’t speak to any one of them. I’d remember the names.”“Could you ask the office staff?”She sighed. “Just a moment,” she said. She put a palm across the receiver and I could hear her relay the question. Muffled conversation ensued and then she removed her hand. “Nobody spoke to any of them either.”“No one from Culver City?”“No-oo.” She sang the word on two notes.“Ah. Well, thanks anyway. I appreciate your time.” I hung up the phone and thought about it for a minute. Who did Mickey talk to for ten minutes? It certainly wasn’t her, I thought. I got up from the desk and went back to the kitchen, where I took out a butter knife and the jar of extra-crunchy Jif. I took a tablespoon of peanut butter on the blade and spread it on the roof of my mouth, working it with my tongue until my palate was coated with a thin layer of goo. “Hello, this is Mrs. Kennison,” I said aloud, in a voice that sounded utterly unlike me.I returned to the phone and dialed the number again. When Terry answered, I asked the name of the school librarian.“You mean Ms. Calloway?” she said.“Oh, that’s right. I’d forgotten. Could you transfer me?”Terry was happy to oblige, and ten seconds later I was going through the same routine, only this time with a variation. “Mrs. Calloway, this is Mrs. Kennison with the district attorney’s office in Culver City, California. A call was placed to this number from Culver City on May seventh, billed to last-name Magruder, first name Mickey or Michael,”“Yes, I spoke to him,” she said, before I could finish my tale.“Ah. Oh, you did. Well, that’s wonderful.”“I don’t know if I’d call it wonderful, but it was pleasant. He seemed like a nice man: articulate, polite.”“Can you remember the nature of the query?”“It was only two weeks ago. I may be close to retirement, but I’m not suffering from senile dementia not yet, at any rate.”“Could you fill me in?”“I could if I understood what this had to do with the district attorney’s office. It sounds fishy as all get out. What’d you say your name was? Because I’m making a note of it, and I intend to check.”I hate it when people think. Why don’t they just mind their own business and respond to my questions? “Mrs. Kennison.”“And the reason for the call?”“I’m sorry, but I’m not at liberty to say. This is a legal matter, and there’s a gag order in effect.”“I see,” she said, as if she didn’t.“Can you tell me what Mr. Magruder wanted?”“Why don’t you ask him?”“Mr. Magruder’s been shot. He’s in a coma at the moment. That’s as much as I can tell you without being cited for contempt of court.”That seemed to work. She said, “He was trying to track down a former Mate High School student.”“Can you give me the name?”“What’s your first name again?”“Kathryn. Kennison. If you like, I can give you my number here and you can call me back.”“Well, that’s silly. You could be anyone,” she snapped. “Let’s just get this over with. What is it you want?”“Any information you can give me.”“The boy’s name was Duncan Oaks, a 1961 graduate. His was an outstanding class. We still talk about that group of students.”“I take it you were the school librarian back then?”“I was. I’ve been here since 1946.”“Did you know Duncan Oaks personally?”“Everybody knew Duncan. He worked as my assistant in his sophomore and junior years. By the time he was a senior, he was the yearbook photographer, prom king, voted most likely to succeed “He sounds terrific.”“He was.”“And where is he now?”“He became a journalist and photographer for one of the local papers, the Louisville Tribune, long since out of business, I’m sorry to say. He died on assignment in Vietnam. The Trib got swallowed up by one of those syndicates a year later, 1966. Now whoever you are and whatever you’re up to, I think I’ve said enough.”I thanked her and hung up, still completely unenlightened. I sat and made notes, using the cap of the pen to scrape the peanut butter from the roof of my mouth. Was this an heir search? Had Mickey taken on a case to supplement his income? He certainly had the background to do P. I. work, but what was he doing and who’d hired him to do it?I heard a tap at my door and leaned over far enough to see Henry peering through the porthole. I felt a guilty pang about the night before. Henry and I seldom had occasion to disagree. In this case, he was right. I had no business withholding information that might be relevant to the police. Really, I was going to reform, I was almost sure. When I opened the door, he handed me a stack of envelopes. “Brought you your mail.”“Henry, I’m sorry. Don’t be mad at me,” I said. I tossed the mail on the desk and gave him a hug while he patted me on the back.“My fault,” he said.‘No, it’s not. It’s mine. You’re entirely right. I was being obstinate.”“No matter. You know I worry about you. What’s wrong with your voice? Are you catching cold?”“I just ate something and it’s stuck in my teeth. I’ll call Detective Aldo today and tell him what I’ve found.”“I’d feel better if you did,” he said. “Did I interrupt? We can do this another time if you’re hard at work.”“Do what another time?”“You said you’d give me a lift. The fellow from the body shop called to say the Chevy’s ready.”“Sorry. Of course. It’s taken long enough. Let me get my jacket and my keys.”On the way over to the body shop, I brought Henry up to date, though I was uncomfortably aware that even now I wasn’t being completely candid with him. I wasn’t lying outright, but I omitted portions of the story. “Which reminds me,” I said. “Did I tell you about that call to my place?”“What call?”“I didn’t think I’d mentioned it. I don’t know what to make of it.” I laid out the business about the thirty minute call from Mickey’s place to mine in late March. “I swear I never talked to him, but I can tell the detectives didn’t believe me.”“What was the date?”“March twenty-seventh, early afternoon, one-thirty. I saw the bill myself.”“You were with me,” he said promptly.“I was?”“Of course. That was the day after the quakes that dumped the cans on my car. I’d called the insurance company and you followed me over to the shop. The claims adjuster met us there at one-fifteen.”“That was that day? How do you remember these things?“I have the estimate,” he said and pulled it from his pocket. “The date’s right here.”The incident returned in a flash. In the early morning hours of March 7 there’d been a series of tremblers, a swarm of quakes as noisy as a herd of horses thundering across the room. I’d woken from a sound sleep with my entire bed shaking. The brightly lighted numbers on my digital alarm showed: 06. Clothes hangers were tinkling, and all the glass in the windows rattled like someone rapping to get in. I’d been up like a shot, pulling on my sweats and my running shoes. Within seconds. that quake passed, only to be followed by another. I could hear glass crashing in the sink. The walls had begun to creak from the strain of the rocking motion. Somewhere across the city, a transformer exploded and I was blanketed in darkness.I’d grabbed my shoulder bag and fumbled down the spiral stairs while I groped in the depths for my penlight. I’d found it and flicked it on. The wash from the beam was pale, but it lighted my way. In the distance, I could hear sirens begin to wail. The trembling ceased. I’d taken advantage of the moment to snag my denim jacket and let myself out the door. Henry was already making his way across the patio. He carried a flashlight the size of a boom box, which he shone in my face. We spent the next hour huddled together in the backyard, fearful of returning indoors until we knew we were safe. The next morning, he’d discovered the damage to his five-window coupe.I’d followed him to the body shop and an hour later I’d driven him home. When I’d returned to my apartment, my message light was blinking. I’d hit the REPLAY button, but there was only a hissing that extended until the tape ran out. I was mildly annoyed. I assumed it was pranksters and let it go at that. Henry was standing right there and heard the same thing I did; he suggested a malfunction when the power had been restored. I’d rewound the tape to erase the hiss and had thought no more about it. Until now.
