---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_025.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["duncan", "yount", "said", "like", "never", "high", "school", "year", "one", "head", "porter", "took", "dark", "time", "way", "back", "name", "could", "see", "oak", "looked", "bar", "came", "male", "street"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit025html

---


Unknown
TWENTY-FOURMy plane arrived in Louisville, Kentucky, at 5:0 P.M., at a gate so remote it appeared to be abandoned or under quarantine. I’d been in Louisville once before, about six months back, when a cross-country romp had ended in a cemetery, with my being the recipient of an undeserved crack on the head. In that case, as with this, I was out a substantial chunk of change, with little hope of recouping my financial losses.As I passed through the terminal, I paused at a public phone booth and checked the local directory on the off chance I’d find Porter Yount listed. I figured the name was unusual and there couldn’t be that many in the greater Louisville area. The high school librarian had told me the Tribune had been swallowed up by a syndicate some twenty years before. I imagined Yount old and retired, if he were alive at all. For once my luck held and I spotted the address and phone number of a Porter Yount, who I assumed was the man I was looking for. According to the phone book, he lived in the 1500 block of Third Street. I made a note of the address and continued to the baggage-claim level, where I forked over my credit card and picked up the keys to the rental car. The woman at Frugal gave me a sheet map and traced out my route: taking the Watterson Expressway east, then picking up I-65 north into the downtown area.I found my car in the designated slot and took a moment to get my bearings. The parking lot was shiny with puddles from a recent shower. Given the low probability of rain any given day in California, I drank in the scent. Even the air felt different: balmy and humid with the late afternoon temperatures in the low 70s. Despite Santa Teresa’s proximity to the Pacific Ocean, the climate is desert-like. Here, a moist spring breeze touched at newly unfurled leaves, and I could see pink and white azaleas bordering the grass. I shrugged out of Mickey’s jacket and locked it in the trunk along with my duffel.I decided to leave the issue of a motel until after I’d talked to Yount. It was close to the dinner hour, and chances were good that I’d find him at home. Following instructions, I took one of the downtown off-ramps, cutting over to Third, where I took a right and crossed Broadway. I drove slowly along Third, scanning house numbers. I finally spotted my destination and pulled in at a bare stretch of curb a few doors away. The tree-lined street, with its three-story houses of dark red brick, must have been lovely in the early days of the century. Now, some of the structures were run-down, and encroaching businesses had begun to mar the nature of the area. The general population was doubtless abandoning the once-stately downtown for the featureless suburbs.Yount’s residence was two and a half stories of red brick faced with pale fieldstone. A wide porch ran along the front of the building. Three wide bay windows were stacked one to a floor. An air conditioner extended from an attic window. The street was lined with similar houses, built close to one another, yards and alleyways behind. In front, between the sidewalk and the street, a border of grass was planted with maples and oaks that must have been there for eighty to a hundred years.I climbed three steps, proceeded along a short cracked walkway, and climbed an additional six steps to the glass door with its tiny foyer visible within. Yount’s residence had apparently once been a single-family dwelling, now broken into five units, judging from the names posted on the mailboxes. Each apartment had a bell, connected to the intercom located near the entrance. I rang Yount’s apartment, waiting two minutes before I rang again. When it became clear he wasn’t answering, I tried a neighbor’s bell instead. After a moment, the intercom crackled to life and an old woman clicked in, saying, “Yes?”I said, “I wonder if you can help me. I’m looking for Porter Yount.”“Speak up.”“Porter Yount in apartment three.”“What’s the time?’ I glanced at my watch. “Six-fifteen.”“He’ll be down yonder on the corner. The Buttercup Tavern.”“Thanks.”I returned to the sidewalk, where I peered up and down the street. Though I didn’t see a sign, I spotted what looked like a corner tavern half a block down. I left my car where it was and walked the short distance through the mild spring air.The Buttercup was dark, cloudy with cigarette smoke, and smelling of bourbon. The local news was being broadcast at low volume on a color TV set mounted in one corner of the room. The dark was further punctuated by neon signs in a series of advertisements for Rolling Rock, Fehr’s, and Stroh’s Beer. The tavern was paneled in highly varnished wood with red leather stools along the length of the bar. Most of the occupants at that hour seemed to be isolated individuals, all men, all smoking, separated from each other by as many empty stools as space allowed. Without exception, each turned to stare at me as I came in.I paused just inside the door and said, “I’m looking for Porter Yount.”A fellow at the far end of the bar raised his hand.Judging from the swiveling heads, my arrival was the most interesting event since the Ohio River flooded in 1937. When I reached Yount, I held my hand out, saying, “I’m Kinsey Millhone.”“Nice meeting you,” he said.We shook hands and I perched on the stool next to his.I said, “How are you?”“Not bad. Thanks for asking.” Porter Yount was heavyset, raspy-voiced, a man in his eighties. He was almost entirely bald, but his brows were still dark, an unruly tangle above eyes that were a startling green. At the moment, he was bleary-eyed with bourbon and his breath smelled like fruitcake. I could see the bartender drift in our direction. He paused in front of us.Yount lit a fresh cigarette and glanced in my direction. He was having trouble with his focus. His mouth seemed to work, but his eyeballs were rolling like two green olives in an empty relish dish. “What’ll you have?”“How about a Fehr’s?”“You don’t want Fehr’s,” he said. And to the bartender, “Lady wants a shot of Early Times with a water back.”“The beer’s fine,” I corrected.The bartender reached into a cooler for the beer, which he opened and placed on the bar in front of me.Yount said peevishly, “Give the lady a glass. Where’s your manners?”The bartender set a glass on the bar and Yount spoke to him again. “Who’s cooking tonight?”“Patsy. Want to see a menu?“Did I say that? This lady and I could use some privacy.”“Oh, sure.” The bartender moved to the other end of the bar, accustomed to Yount’s manner.Yount shook his head with exasperation and his gaze slid in my direction. His head was round as a ball, sitting on the heft of his shoulders with scarcely any neck between. His shirt was a dark polyester, probably selected for stain concealment and ease of laundering. A pair of dark suspenders kept his pants hiked high above his waist. He wore dark socks and sandals, with an inch of shinbone showing. “Outfit okay? If I’d knowed you was coming, I’d’ve wore my Sunday best,” he said, deliberately fracturing his grammar.I had to laugh. “Sorry. I tend to look carefully at just about everything.”“You a journalist?”I shook my head. “A private investigator. I’m trying to get a line on Duncan Oaks. You remember him?”“Of course. You’re the second detective to come in here asking after him this month.”“You talked to Mickey Magruder?”“That’s the one,” he said.“I thought as much.”“Why’d he send you? He didn’t take me at my word?”“We didn’t talk. He was shot last week and he’s been in a coma ever since.”“Sorry to hear that. I liked him. He’s smart. First fella I met who could match me drink for drink.”“He’s talented that way. At any rate, I’m doing what I can to follow up his investigation. It’s tough, since I don’t really know what he’d accomplished. I hope this won’t turn out to be a waste of your time.”“Drinking’s a waste of time, not talking to pretty ladies. What’s the sudden interest in Oaks?”“His name’s cropped up in connection with another matter, something in California, which is where I’m from. I know he once worked for the Tribune. Your name was on his press pass, so I thought I’d talk to you. “Fool’s errand if I ever heard one. He’s been dead twenty years.”“So I heard. I’m sorry for the repetition, but if you tell me what you told Mickey, maybe we can figure out if he’s relevant.”Yount took a swallow of whiskey and tapped the ash off his cigarette. “He’s a ‘war correspondent’ pretty fancy title for a paper like the Trib. I don’t think even the Courier-journal had a correspondent back then. This was in the early sixties.”“Did you hire him yourself?”“Oh, sure. He’s a local boy, a blue-blood, high society: good looks, ambition, an ego big as your head. More charisma than character.” His elbow slid off the bar, and he caught himself with a jerk that we both ignored. Mentally, he seemed sharp. It was his body that tended to slip out of gear.“Meaning what?”“Not to speak ill of the dead, but I suspect he’d peaked out. You must know people like that yourself. High school’s the glory days; after that, nothing much. It’s not like he did poorly, but he never did as well. He’s a fellow cut corners, never really earned his stripes, so to speak.”“Where’d he go to college?”“He didn’t. Duncan wasn’t school-smart. He’s a bright kid, made good grades, but he never cared much for academics. He had drive and aspirations. He figured he’d learn more in the real world so he nixed the idea.”“Was he right about that?”“Hard to say. Kid loved to hustle. Talked me into paying him seventy-five dollars a week, which, frankly, we didn’t have. Even in those days, his salary was a pittance, but he didn’t care.”“Because he came from money?”“That’s right. Revel Oaks, his daddy, made a fortune in the sin trades, whiskey and tobacco. That and real estate speculation. Duncan grew up in an atmosphere of privilege. Hell, his daddy would’ve given him anything he wanted: travel, the best schools, place in the family business. Duncan had other fish to fry.”“For instance?”He waved his cigarette in the air. “Like I said, he wangled his way into a job with the Trib, mostly on the basis of his daddy’s influence.”“And what did he want?”“Adventure, recognition. Duncan was addicted to living on the edge. Craved the limelight, craved risk. He wanted to go to Vietnam and report on the war. Nothing would do until he got his way.”“But why not enlist? If you’re craving life on the edge, why not the infantry? That’s about as close to the edge as you can get.”“Military wouldn’t touch him. Had a heart murmur sounded like water pouring through a sluice. That’s when he came to us. Wasn’t any way the Trib could afford his ticket to Saigon. Didn’t matter to him. He paid his own way. As long as he had access, he’s happy as a clam. In those days, we’re talking Neil Sheehan, David Halberstam, Mal Browne, Homer Bigart. Duncan pictured his byline in papers all across the country. He did a series of local interviews with newlyweds, army wives left behind when their husbands went off to war. The idea was to follow up, talk to the husbands, and see the fighting from their perspective.”“Not a bad idea.”“We thought it had promise, especially with so many of his classmates getting drafted. Any rate, he got his press credentials and his passport. He flew from Hong Kong to Saigon and from there to Pleiku. For a while, he was fine, hitching rides on military transports, any place they’d take him. To give him credit, I think he might have turned into a hell of a journalist. He had a way with words, but he lacked experience.”“How long was he there?”“Couple months is all. He heard about some action in a place called la Drang. I guess he pulled strings, maybe his old man again or just his personal charm. It was a hell of a battle, some say the worst of the war. After that came LZ Albany: something like three hundred fellas killed in the space of four days. Must have found himself caught in the thick of it with no way out. We heard later he was hit, but we never got a sense of how serious it was.”“And then what?”Yount paused to extinguish his cigarette. He missed the ashtray altogether and stubbed out the burning ember on the bar. “That’s as much as I know. He’s supposed to be medevacked out, but he never made it back. Chopper took off with a bellyful of body bags and a handful of casualties. Landed forty minutes later with no Duncan aboard. His daddy raised hell, got some high Pentagon official to launch an investigation, but it never came to much.”“And that’s it?”“I’m afraid so. You hungry? Ask me, it’s time to eat.”“Fine with me,” I said.Porter gestured to the bartender, who ambled back in our direction. “Tell Patsy to put together couple of Hot Browns.”“Good enough,” the man said. He set his towel aside, came out from behind the bar, and headed for a door I assumed led to Patsy in the kitchen.Yount said, “Bet you never ate one.”“What’s a Hot Brown?”“Invented at the Brown Hotel. Wait and see. Now, where was l?”“Trying to figure out the fate of Duncan Oaks,” I said.“He’s dead.”“How do you know?”“He’s never been heard from since.”“Isn’t it possible he panicked and took off on foot?”“Absence of a body, anything’s possible, I guess.”“But not likely?”“I’d say not. The way we heard it later, the NVA were everywhere, scourin’ the area for wounded, killing them for sport. Duncan had no training. He probably couldn’t get a hundred yards on his own.”“I wonder if you’d look at something.” I hauled up my bag from its place near my feet. I removed the snapshot, the press pass, and the dog tags embossed with Duncan’s name.Young tucked his cigarette in the corner of his mouth, examining the items through a plume of smoke. “Same things Magruder showed me. How’d he come by them?”“A guy named Benny Quintero had them. You know him?”“Name doesn’t sound familiar.”“That’s him in the picture. I’m assuming this is Duncan.”“That’s him. When’s this taken?”“Quintero’s brother thinks la Drang. Benny was wounded November seventeenth.”“Same as Duncan,” he said. “This’d have to be one of the last pictures of Duncan ever taken.”“I hadn’t thought of that, but probably so.”Yount returned the snapshot, which I tucked in my bag.“Benny’s another Louisville boy. He died in Santa Teresa in 1974, probably a homicide, though there was never an arrest.” I took a few minutes to detail the story of Benny’s death. “Mickey didn’t mention this?”“Never said a word. How’s Quintero tie in?”“I can give you the superficial answer. His brother says he went to Manual; I’m guessing, at the same time Duncan went to Male. It seems curious he’d end up with Duncan’s personal possessions.”Porter shook his head. “Wonder why he kept them?”“Not a clue,” I said. “They were in a lockbox in his room. His brother came across them maybe six months back. He brought them to California.” I thought about it for a moment, and then I said, “What’s Duncan doing with a set of dog tags if he was never in the service?”“He had them made up himself. Appealed to his sense of theater. One more example of how he liked to operate: looking like a soldier was as, good as being one. I’m surprised he didn’t hang out In uniform, but I guess that’d be pushing it. Don’t get me wrong. I liked Duncan, but he’s a fella with shabby standards.”A woman, probably Patsy, appeared from the kitchen with a steaming ramekin in each of her ovenmitted hands. She put a dish in front of each of us and handed us two sets of flatware rolled in paper napkins. Young murmured “thanks” and she said, “You’re entirely welcome.”I stared at the dish, which looked like a lake of piping-hot yellow sludge, with a dusting of paprika and something lumpy underneath. “What is this?”“Eat and find out.”I picked up my fork and tried a tiny bite. A Hot Brown turned out to be an open-faced sliced turkey sandwich, complete with bacon and tomatoes, baked with the most divine cheese sauce I ever set to my lips. I mewed like a kitten.“Told you so,” he said, with satisfaction.When I was finished, I wiped my mouth and took a sip of beer. “What about Duncan’s parents? Does he still have family in the area?”Yount shook his head. “Revel died of a heart attack a few years back: 1974, if memory serves.. His mother died three years later of a stroke.”“Siblings, cousins?”“Not a one,” he said. “Duncan was an only child, and his daddy was too. I doubt you’d find anyone left on his mother’s side of the family either. Her people were from Pike County, over on the West Virginia border. Dirt poor. Once she married Revel, she cut all ties with them.”He glanced at his watch. It was close to 8 P.M. “Time for me get home. My program’s coming on in two minutes.”“I appreciate your time. Can I buy your dinner?”Yount gave me a look. “Obvious you haven’t spent any time in the South. Lady doesn’t buy dinner for a gent. That’s his prerogative.” He reached in his pocket, pulled out a wad of bills, and tossed several on the bar.At his suggestion, I spent the night at the Leisure Inn on Broadway. I might have tried the Brown Hotel, but it looked way too fancy for the likes of me. The Leisure Inn was plain, a sensible establishment of Formica, nylon carpet, foam rubber pillows, and a layer of crackling plastic laid under the bottom sheet in case I wet the bed. I put a call through to the airline and discussed the options for my return. The first (and only) seat available was on a P.M. flight the next day. I snagged it, wondering what I was going to do with myself until then. I considered a side visit to Louisville Male High, where Duncan had graduated with the class of 1961. Secretly, I doubted there was much to learn. Porter Yount had painted an unappealing portrait of the young Duncan Oaks. To me, he sounded shallow, spoiled, and manipulative. On the other hand, he was just a kid when he died: twenty-two, twenty-three years old at the outside. I suspect most of us are completely self-involved at that age. At twenty-two, I’d already been married and divorced. By twenty-three, I was not only married to Daniel but I’d left the police department and was totally adrift. I’d thought I was mature, but I was foolish and unenlightened. My judgment was faulty and my perception was flawed. So who was I to judge Duncan? He might have become a good man if he’d lived long enough. Thinking about it, I felt a curious secondhand sorrow for all the chances he’d missed, the lessons he never learned, the dreams he’d had to forfeit with his early death. Whoever he was and whatever he’d been, I could at least pay my respects.At ten the next morning, I parked my rental car on a side street not far from Louisville Male High School, at the corner of Brook Street and Breckinridge. The building was three stories tall, constructed of dark red brick with white concrete trim. The surrounding neighborhood consisted of narrow red-brick houses with narrow walkways between. Many looked as if the interiors would smell peculiar. I went up the concrete stairs. Above the entrance, two gnome-like scholars were nestled in matching niches, reading plaques of some kind. The dates 1914 and 1915 were chiseled in stone, indicating, I supposed, the year the building had gone up. I pushed through the front door and went in.The interior was defined by gray marble wainscoting, with gray-painted walls above. The foyer floor was speckled gray marble with inexplicable cracks here and there. In the auditorium, dead ahead, I could see descending banks of curved wooden seats and tiers of wooden flooring, faintly buckled with age. Classes must have been in session, because the corridors were empty and there was little traffic on the stairs. I went into the school office. The windows were tall. Long planks of fluorescent lighting hung from ceilings covered with acoustical tile. I asked for the school library and was directed to the third floor.The school librarian, Mrs. Calloway, was a sturdy-looking soul in a calf-length denim skirt and a pair of indestructible walking shoes. Her iron-gray hair was chopped off in a fuss-free style she’d probably worn for years. Close to retirement, she looked like a woman who’d favor muesli, yoga, liniments, SAVE THE WHALES bumper stickers, polar-bear swims, and lengthy bicycle tours of foreign countries. When I asked to see a copy of the ’61 yearbook, she gave me a look but refrained from comment. She handed me the Bulldog and I took a seat at an empty table. She returned to her desk and busied herself, though I could tell she intended to keep an eye on me.I spent a few minutes leafing through the Bulldog, looking at the black-and-white portraits of the senior class. I didn’t check for Duncan’s name. I simply absorbed the whole, trying to get a feel for the era, which predated mine by six years. The school had originally been all male, but it had turned coed somewhere along the way. Senior pictures showed the boys wearing coats and ties, their hair in brush cuts that emphasized their big ears and oddly shaped heads.Many wore glasses with heavy black frames. The girls tended toward short hair and dark gray or black crew-neck sweaters. Each wore a simple strand of pearls, probably a necklace provided by the photographer for uniformity. By 1967, the year I graduated, the hairstyles were bouffant, as stiffly lacquered as wigs, with flipped ends sticking out. The boys had all turned into Elvis Presley clones. Here, in candid class photos, most students wore penny loafers and white crew socks, and the girls were decked out in straight or pleated skirts that hit them at the knee.I breezed by the Good News Club, the Speech Club, the Art Club, the Pep Club, and the Chess Club. In views of classes devoted to industrial arts, home ec, and world science, students were clumped together pointing at wall maps or gathered around the teacher’s desk, smiling and pretending to look interested. The teachers all appeared to be fifty-five and as dull as dust.At Thanksgiving of that year, the fall of 1960, the annual Male-Manual game was played. Male High was victorious by a score of 0-6. “MALE BEATS MANUAL 0 To 6, CLINCHES CITY & AAA CROWNS,” the article said. “A neat, well-deserved licking of the duPont Manual Rams.” Co-captains were Walter Morris and Joe Blankenship. The rivalry between the two high schools had been long and fierce, beginning in 1893 and doubtless continuing to the present. At that time, the record showed 9 wins for Male, 19 for Manual, and 5 games tied. At the bottom of the page, in the accompanying photograph of the Manual offense, I found a halfback named Quintero, weighing 160.I went back to the first page and started through again. Duncan Oaks showed up in a number of photographs, dark-haired and handsome. He’d been elected vice president, prom king, and class photographer. His name and face seemed to crop up in many guises: the senior play, Quill and Scroll, Glee Club. He was a Youth Speaks delegate, office aide, and library assistant.He hadn’t garnered academic honors, but he had played football. I found a picture of him on the Male High team, a 160-pound halfback. Now that was interesting: Duncan Oaks and Benny Quintero had played the same position on opposing teams. They must have known each other, by reputation if nothing else. I thought about Porter Yount’s comment that these were Duncan’s glory years, that his life after this never approached the same heights. That might have been true for Quintero as well. In retrospect, it seemed touching that their paths had crossed again in Vietnam.I turned to the front of the book and studied the picture of Duncan as prom king. He was wearing a tuxedo: shorn, clean-shaven, with a white boutonniere tucked into his lapel. I turned the page and studied the prom queen, wondering if they were boyfriend/girlfriend or simply elected separately and honored on the same occasion. Darlene LaDestro. Well, this was a type I’d known well. Long blond hair pulled up in a swirl on top, a strong nose, patrician air. She looked classy, familiar, like girls in my high school who came from big-time money. Though not conventionally pretty, Darlene was the kind of girl who’d age with style. She’d come back to class reunions having married her social equal, still thin as a rail, hair streaked tastefully with gray. Darlene LaDestro, what a name. You’d think she’d have dumped it the first chance she got, called herself Dodie or Dessie or A chill swept through me, and I made an involuntary bark of astonishment. Mrs. Calloway looked up, and I shook my head to indicate that I was fine, though I wasn’t. No wonder Darlene looked familiar. She was currently Laddie Bethel, alive and well and living in Santa Teresa.
