---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_020.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["said", "could", "duffy", "one", "like", "going", "jonah", "clump", "room", "right", "two", "know", "got", "heard", "phone", "name", "girl", "back", "door", "someone", "found", "well", "camilla", "see", "marcel"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit020html

---


Unknown
NINETEENI’m going to skip a bunch of stuff here because, really, who cares? We ate. We drank, and then we ate some more. I didn’t spill, fart, fall down, or otherwise disgrace myself. I talked to the couple from Palm Springs, who turned out to be nice, as were most of the other folk. I listened with feigned interest to a lengthy discussion about vintage jaguars and antique Rolls-Royces and another in which the participants told where they were when the last big local earthquake struck. Some of the answers were: the south of France, Barbados, the Galapagos Islands. I confessed I was in town, scrubbing out my toilet bowl, when a bunch of water slopped up and splashed my face. That got a big laugh. What a kidder, that girl. I felt I was just getting the hang of how to talk to the rich when the following occurred.Stewart crossed the atrium with a bottle of Chardonnay and offered to fill my glass. I declined, I’d had plenty, but Dixie leaned toward him so he could refill hers. The collar of her silk shirt gaped briefly in the process, and I caught a glimpse of the necklace she wore in the hollow of her throat.Threaded on a gold chain was a tiny gold heart with a pink rose enameled in the center. I felt my smile falter. Fortunately, Dixie was looking elsewhere and didn’t notice the change in my expression. I could feel my cheeks heat. The necklace was a duplicate of the one I’d seen in Mickey’s bed-table drawer.Now it was possible, remotely possible, he’d given her the necklace fourteen years before, in honor of the affair they were having back then. I set my glass on the table next to me and got to my feet. No one seemed to pay attention as I walked across the room. I passed through the doors into the dining room, where I spotted the same maid who’d answered the door.I said, “Excuse me. Where’s the nearest bathroom?” I couldn’t, for the life of me, refer to it as the “loo.”“Turn right at the foyer. It’s the second door on the right.”“I think someone’s in there. Dixie said to use hers.”“Master bedroom’s at the end of the hallway to the left of the foyer.”“Thanks,” I said. As I passed the chair where I’d secured my handbag, I leaned down and picked it up. I moved through the living room and out into the foyer, where I turned left. I walked quickly, keeping my weight on my toes so the tap of my heels wouldn’t advertise my passage. The double doors to the master bedroom stood open to reveal a room twice the size of my apartment. The pale limestone floors were the same throughout. All the colors here were muted: linens like gossamer, wall coverings of pale silk. There were two bathrooms, his ‘n’ hers, one on either side of the room. Eric’s was nearer, fitted with an enormous roll-in shower and a wall-mounted bar to one side of the toilet. I turned on my heel and headed into the second.Dixie’s dressing table was a fifteen-foot slab of marble that stretched along one wall. There was a second wall of closets, a glass shower enclosure, a massive tub with jacuzzi, and a separate dressing room with an additional U of hanging space. I closed the bathroom door behind me and started going through her belongings. This impulse to snoop was getting out of control. I just couldn’t seem to keep my nose out of other people’s business. The more obstacles the merrier. I found the cologne bottle in a cluster of ten others on a silver tray. On the bottom was the same partially torn label I’d seen at Mickey’s. I sniffed at the spray. The scent was unmistakably the same.I returned to the bedroom, where I crossed to the bed. I opened the top drawer in the first of the two matching bed tables. There sat the diaphragm case. I could hardly believe she was screwing him again, or was it still? No wonder she’d been nervous, prowling my backyard, angling for information about his current state. She must have wondered at his silence, wondered where he’d been the night she retrieved her personal items. Did she know he’d been shot? Hell, she might have done it herself if she’d found out about Thea. Maybe she was only quizzing me to determine what, if anything, I knew. I thought back to my conversation with Thea at the Honky-Tonk. Now I wondered if she’d seen the diaphragm et al., assuming it was mine while I’d assumed it belonged to her.I closed the drawer and retraced my steps, emerging from the master suite just as Eric appeared, wheeling himself in my direction. I said, “Great bathroom. The maid sent me down here because the other was in use.”“I wondered where you went. I thought you left.”“I was just powdering my nose,” I said, and then glanced at my watch. “Actually, I do have to go, now you mention it. I agreed to meet someone at eight, and it’s almost that now.”“You have a date?”“You don’t have to sound so surprised.”He smiled. “Sorry. I didn’t mean to pry.”“Could you give Dixie my thanks? I know it’s rude not to do it personally, but I thought I’d slip out without making a fuss. Sometimes one person leaves and it starts an exodus.”“Sure thing.”“I appreciate the invitation. This was fun.”“We’ll have to try it again. What’s your schedule like next week?”“My schedule?”“I thought we’d have lunch, just the two of us,” he said.“Ah. I don’t remember offhand. I’ll check when I hit the office and call you on Monday.“I’ll be waiting.”Inwardly, I found myself backing away. Ordinarily, I don’t imagine men are coming on to me, but his tone was flirtatious, which didn’t sit well with me. I became especially chirpy as I made my retreat. Eric seemed amused by my discomfiture.I was letting myself into my apartment some fifteen minutes later when I heard the last of a message being left on my machine. Jonah. I dropped my bag on the floor and snatched at the phone, but by then he’d hung up. I pressed the PLAY button and heard the rerun of his brief communication.“Kinsey. Jonah here. It looks like we found your boy. Give me a call, and I’ll fill you in on the nitty-gritty details. Not a very nice guy, but you probably know that already. I’m at home.”I looked up his home number and dialed with impatience, listening to ring after ring. “Come on, come on.”“Hello?”Oh, shit. Camilla.I said, “Could I speak to Lieutenant Robb? I’m returning his call.”“And who’s this?”“Kinsey Millhone.”Dead silence.Then she said, “He’s busy at the moment. Is this something I can help you with?”“Not really. He has some information for me. Could I speak to him, please?”“Just a minute,” she said, not entirely happy about the situation. I heard a clunk as she placed the handset on the tabletop, then the tapping of her heels as she walked away. After that, I was treated to all the quaint, domestic sounds of the Robbs’ Saturday night as they hung around the house. I could hear the television set in a distant room. Closer to the phone, one of his girls, probably Courtney, the older one, played chopsticks on an out-of-tune piano, never quite finishing her portion of the musical duet. I listened to countless repetitions of the first fifteen to twenty notes. The other daughter, whose name I forget, would chime in at the wrong spot, which caused the first girl to protest and start over again. The second child kept saying, “Stop it!” which the first girl declined to do. In the meantime, I could hear Camilla’s comments to Jonah, who apparently hadn’t been told there was a call for him. I could hear the sound of water running, the clattering of plates. I knew she was doing it deliberately, forcing me to eavesdrop on the small homely drama being played out for my benefit.I whistled into the mouthpiece. I said “HELLO!” about six times, to no avail. I knew if I hung up, all I’d get was a busy signal when I tried calling back. Clump, clump, clump. I heard advancing footsteps on the hardwood floor. I yelled “HEY!” Clump, clump, clump. The footsteps receded. Another round of chopsticks was played. Shrieks from the girls. Chitchat between husband and wife. Camilla’s seductive laughter as she teased Jonah about something. Once more I cursed myself for never learning how to do the piercing whistle you make when you put two fingers between your teeth. I’d pay six hundred dollars if someone could teach me that. Think of the taxis you could summon, the waiters you could signal across a crowded room. Clump, clump, clump. Someone approached the phone, and I heard Jonah remark with annoyance, “Hey, who left this off? I’m expecting a call.”I yelled “JONAH!” but not quickly enough to prevent his replacing the handset in the cradle. I redialed the number, but the line was busy. Camilla’d probably picked up another phone in haste, just to make certain I couldn’t get through. I waited a minute and tried again. Still busy. On my fourth attempt, I heard the phone ring, only to have Camilla pick up again. This time she didn’t even bother to say hello. I heard her breathe in my ear.I said, “Camilla, if you don’t put Jonah on the phone, I’m going to get in my car and drive over there right this minute.”She sang out, “Jonah? For you.”Four seconds later he said, “Hello?”“Hi, Jonah. It’s Kinsey. I just got home and picked up your message. What’s going on?”“Listen, you’re going to love this. Bobbi Deems pulled your biker over last night when she saw he had a taillight out. Kid’s name is Carlin Duffy, and it turns out he’s driving with an expired Kentucky driver’s license and expired registration. Bobbi cited him for both and impounded the bike.”“Where in Kentucky?”“Louisville, she said. You want him, he’ll be in court in thirty days.”“What about before then? Does he have a local address?”“More or less. He claims he’s living in a maintenance shed at that nursery off the 101 at the Peterson exit. Apparently, he works there part-time in exchange for rent, a claim the owner confirms. Meanwhile, Bobbi ran a background check on this crud, who’s got a criminal history as long as your arm: arrests and convictions going back to 1980.”“For what?”“Mostly nickel-and-dime stuff. He never killed anyone.”“I’m so relieved,” I said.“Let’s see what we got here: wanton endangerment, criminal recklessness, theft, receiving stolen property, criminal mischief, trying to flee a halfway house where he was serving a ninety-day sentence for giving a false name to a police officer. The guy’s not too bright, but he’s consistent.”“Any outstanding warrants?”“Nada. For the moment, he’s clean.”“Too bad. It’d have been nice to have him picked up so I could talk to him.”“You’ll definitely want to do that. Here’s the best part. You ready? You want to know who his brother is? You’ll never guess.”“I give up.”“Benny Quintero.”I could feel myself squint. “You’re kidding me.”“It’s true.”“How’d you figure that one out?”“I didn’t. Bobbi did. Apparently, Benny’s name was listed as the owner on the bike registration, so Bobbi put Duffy through his paces. She’d forgotten the story, but she remembered Benny’s name. Duffy claims they’re half brothers. His mom was originally married to Benny’s dad, who died in World War Two. Ten years later, she moved to Kentucky, where she married Duffy’s dad. He was born the next year, fifteen-year age gap between the two boys. Carlin was thirteen when Benny came out to California and got himself killed.”“Is that why he’s here?”“You’d have to ask him. I’m thinking it’s a good bet, unless you happen to believe in coincidence.”“I don’t.”“Nor do I.“So where is he now?”“Well, he can’t be far off if he’s hoofing it.”“He could have stolen a car.”“Always possible, I guess, though outside his area of expertise. Anyway, if you decide to go looking for him, take someone along. I don’t like the idea of your seeing him alone.”“You want to go?”“Sure, I’d love it. Wait a second.” He put a hand across the mouthpiece. Camilla must have been hovering nearby, listening to every word, because she squelched the idea before he even had the chance to ask. He removed his hand from the mouthpiece, addressing me again. “I’m tied up tonight, but how’s Monday. Does that work?”“Sounds ducky.”“You’ll call me?”“Of course.”“I’ll see you then,” he said.As soon as he clicked off, I grabbed my handbag and walked out the door. I wasn’t going to wait until Monday. How ridiculous. Duffy could be long gone; I couldn’t take the risk. I stopped for gas on the way out. The nursery was maybe ten minutes away, but the needle on my gas gauge was now pointing at E, and I wasn’t sure how much driving I’d have to do catching up with him.It was twenty of nine when I finally pulled into the parking lot at the nursery. The sign out front indicated the place was open until 9 P.M. on weekends. The property must have occupied some ten to fifteen acres, the land sandwiched between the highway on one side and the side street into which I’d turned. The gardening center was immediately in front of me, a low white glass-and-frame building that accommodated numerous bedding, landscape, and house plants, seeds, gardening books, bulbs, herbs, pottery, and gifts, for “that special someone with a talent for growing.”To the right, behind the chain-link enclosure, I could see an array of fountains and statuary for sale, ceramic, plastic, and redwood planters, along with big plastic bags of fertilizers, mulches, garden chemicals, and soil amendments. To the left, I could see a series of greenhouses, like opaque glass barracks, and, beyond them, row after row of trees, a shaggy forest of shadows stretching back toward the freeway.Now that the sun was fully down, the lingering light had shifted to a charred black, permeated by the smell of sod. The area along the side street was well lighted, but the far reaches of the nursery were shrouded in darkness. I scrounged around in the backseat and found a medium-weight denim jacket that I hoped would offer warmth against the chill night air. I locked the car and went into the gardening center with its harsh fluorescent lights shining down on banks of seed packs and gaudy indoor blooms.The girl at the counter wore a forest-green smock with the name Himes embroidered across the pocket. As I closed the door, she gave the air a surreptitious fanning. She was in her teens, with dry blond hair and heavy pancake makeup over bumpy cheeks and chin. The air smelled of a recently extinguished clove cigarette.“Hi. I’m looking for Carlin. Is he here?”“Who?”“Carlin Duffy, the guy with the bike who’s living in the shed.”“Oh, Duffy. He’s not here. The cops took his bike and locked it in the impound lot. He said it’s going to cost a bundle to get it out.”“Bummer.”“He was really pissed. What a bunch of pigs.”“The worst. You two are friends?”She shrugged. “My mom doesn’t like him. He’s a bum, she says, but I don’t see why it’s his fault if he’s new in town.”“How long’s he been here?”“Maybe five or six months. He came like right before Christmas, sometime right around in there. Mr. Himes caught this other guy, Marcel? Do you know him”“Uh-uh.”“Marcel stole a bunch of these plants and sold ‘ern on the street? Mr. Himes fired his sorry butt as soon as he found out.”“And Duffy got his job shortly afterward?”“Well, yeah. Mr. Himes had no idea Marcel was cheating him until Duffy bought a dieffenbachia off him and brought it in,” she said. “I mean, Duffy’s smart. He figured it’s a scam right off. He only paid Marcel I guess a buck or two and there’s our tag, like for $1.99, pasted on the side.”“What about Marcel? I bet he swore up and down he didn’t do it, right?”“Right. What a dork. He acted all crushed and upset, like he’s completely innocent. Oh, sure. He said he’d sue, but I don’t see how he could.”“His word against Duffy’s, and who’s going to believe him. Is Marcel black, perchance?”She nodded. “You know how they are,” she said, rolling her eyes. For the first time, she assessed me. “How do you know Duffy?”“Through his brother, Ben.”“Duffy has a brother? Well, that’s weird,” she said. “He told me his family’s dead and gone.”“His brother’s been dead for years.”“Oh. Too bad.”“What time will he be back?”“Probably not until ten.”“Well, shoot,” I said.“Did he say he’d meet you here?”“Nah. I saw him at the Tonk last night and then lost track of him.”“He’s probably there tonight,” she said helpfully. “You want to use the phone? You could have him paged. He’s pals with the owner. I think his name is Tim.,’ “Really? I know Tim,” I said. “Maybe I’ll pop over there, since it isn’t far. Meantime, if he comes in? Tell him I was here. I’d like to speak to him.”“About what?”“About what?” I repeated. “In case he asks,” she said. “It’s sort of a surprise.”
