---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_007.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["said", "dixie", "like", "know", "could", "see", "long", "mickey", "would", "back", "one", "much", "woman", "eric", "little", "something", "far", "white", "without", "took", "u", "cigarette", "want", "wall", "someone"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit007html

---


Unknown
SIXForbes Run was a meandering lane-and-a-half, a ribbon of pavement that snaked back and forth as it angled upward into the foothills. Massive branches of live oak hung out over the road. There were no houses visible, as far as I could see, but a series of markers suggested that large properties branched off at intervals. I watched the numbers progress, the signs leapfrogging from one side of the road to the other, alternating even and odd: 17,0,3,6. The Hightowers’ estate, at 9, was surrounded by a low fieldstone wall, accessible through wooden gates that opened electronically as soon as I pressed the button. Either the Hightowers were expecting someone or they didn’t much care who appeared at their door.The driveway extended perhaps a quarter of a mile and conjured up visions of a proper English manor house at the far end, a three-story Tudor with a steeply pitched slate roof. What I spotted, at long last, was nothing of the kind. The house was contemporary: long and low, hugging the ground, with an oversized roofline rising to a center peak. I could see four wide fieldstone chimneys, clusters of fan palms, and colossal black boulders the size of my car that must have erupted from Vesuvius and been transported to the grounds for effect. To the right, I could see a line of four garage doors.I parked in the large circular parking area in front and made my way up the wide, sloping concrete walk. A woman, perhaps thirty, in tennis shoes, jeans, and a white T-shirt, was already standing in the open doorway, awaiting my arrival. This definitely wasn’t Dixie, and I wondered for a fleeting moment if I’d come to the wrong house.“Ms. Yablonsky?” she said.“Actually, I’m not. I’m looking for Eric and Dixie Hightower. Am I in the right place?”“Sorry. Of course. I thought you were someone else. We’ve been interviewing for staff positions, and the woman’s half an hour late. Is Mrs. Hightower expecting you?” The woman herself remained nameless and without title: parlor maid, factotum, personal assistant. I guess she felt she was under no obligation to introduce herself.“I’m an old friend,” I said. I took out a business card and handed it to her.She read the face of it, frowning. “A private detective? What’s this about?”“I’m hoping they can put me in touch with a mutual acquaintance. A guy named Mickey Magruder. My ex-husband.”“Oh. Why don’t you come in and I’ll tell Mrs. Hightower you’re here.”“Is Eric home?”“Mr. Hightower’s out of town, but he should be home soon.”I stepped into the foyer, waiting uneasily while she disappeared from sight. I’m sometimes puzzled by wealth, which seems to have a set of rules of its own. Was I free to amble about or should I wait where I was? There was an angular stone bench positioned against one wall. The woman hadn’t suggested I sit and I was loath to presume. Suppose it turned out to be a sculpture that collapsed under my weight? I did a one-eighty turn so I could scrutinize the place like a burglar-in-training, a little game I play. I noted entrances and exits, wondering about the possibility of a wall safe. If I were bugging the place, where would I tuck the surveillance equipment?The floors were polished limestone, as pale as beach sand. I could see ancient marine creatures pressed into the surface, a tiny fossil museum at my feet. A wide corridor stretched off to the right. The ceiling was twelve feet high with floor-to-ceiling windows on one side. The facing walls were painted a snowy white and hung with a series of bright abstracts, oil paintings six feet tall, probably expensive and done by someone dead.Before me, a pair of double doors stood open and I could see into the living room, easily thirty feet long. Again, the walls on the far side were floor-to-ceiling glass, this time with a panoramic view of pines, live oaks, giant ferns, eucalyptus, and the mountains beyond. I listened and, hearing nothing, tiptoed into the room to have a better look. The wood-beamed ceiling slanted upward to near-cathedral height. On the left, there was a marble-faced fireplace with a hearth twenty-six feet long. On the other end of the room, glass-enclosed shelves showcased a variety of art objects. To the left, I could see a built-in wet bar. The furniture was simple: large armless black leather couches and chairs, chrome-and-glass tables, a grand piano, recessed lighting.I heard footsteps tap-tap-tapping down the hallway in my direction. I’d just managed to giant-step my way across the foyer to my original position when Dixie came into view. She wore skintight blue jeans, boots with spike heels, and a buff-colored blazer over a snowy white silk tank top. Her jewelry was Bakelite, two chunky bracelets that clattered on her narrow wrist. Now forty years old, she was still extremely thin: small hips, flat stomach, scarcely any butt to speak of. The shoulder pads in her jacket made it look like she was wearing protective gear. Her hair was pulled back away from her face, an oh-sochic mess in a shade that suggested copious chemical assistance, a red somewhere between claret and burnt ocher. Gone were the false lashes and all the heavy black eyeliner. Curiously, the absence of makeup made her eyes seem much larger and her features more delicate. Her skin was sallow and there were dark circles under her eyes, lines in her forehead, cords showing in her neck. Hard to believe she hadn’t yet availed herself of a little surgical refreshment. Even so, she looked glamorous. There was something brisk and brittle in the way she carried herself. She seemed to know who I was, using my name with an artificial warmth as she held out her hand. “Kinsey. How nice. What an incredible surprise. Stephie said you were here. It’s been years.”“Hello, Dixie. You look great. I wasn’t sure you’d remember me.”“How could I forget?” she said. “I’m sorry you missed Eric.” Her gaze took me in without so much as a flicker of interest. Like her, I wore jeans, though mine were cut without style, the kind worn to wash cars or clean hair clots from the bathroom standpipe. In the years since I’d seen her, she’d risen in social stature, acquiring an almost indescribable air of elegance. No need to wear diamonds when plastic would do. Her jacket was wrinkled in the manner of expensive fabrics, linens and silks, you know how it is with that shit.She glanced at her watch, which she wore on the inner aspect of her wrist. The watch was forties vintage, stingy-sized crystal surrounded by little bitty diamonds on a band of black cording. I’d seen nicer versions at the swap meet, which just goes to show what I know about these things. Hers was probably rare, recognizable on sight by those who shopped in the tony places she did. “Would you like a drink?” she asked. “It’s nearly cocktail time.”My watch said 4:10. I said, “Sure, why not?” I almost made a joke about crème de menthe frappés, but a black guy in a white jacket had materialized, a silver tray in hand. A bartender of her own? This was getting good.She said, “What would you like”“Chardonnay sounds fine.”“We’ll be out on the patio,” she remarked, without directly addressing her faithful attendant. My, my, my. Another cipher accounted for in the nameless servant class. I noticed Dixie didn’t need to specify what she’d be drinking.I followed her through the stone-floored dining room. The table was a rhomboid of cherry, with sufficient chairs assembled for a party of twelve. Something odd was at work, and it took me a moment to figure out what it was. There were no steps, no changes in elevation, no area rugs, and no signs of wall-to-wall carpet within view. I thought of Eric in his wheelchair, wondering if the floors were left bare for his benefit.It struck me as peculiar that Dixie hadn’t yet questioned the reason for my unannounced arrival at her door. Maybe she’d been waiting for me all these years, rehearsing responses to numerous imaginary conversations. She’d always known she’d been screwing around with Mickey, whereas I’d just found out, which put me at a disadvantage. I don’t often go up against other women in verbal combat. Such clashes are strange, but not without a certain prurient attraction. I thought of all the male-fantasy movies where women fight like alley cats, pulling at each other’s hair while they roll around on the floor. I’d never had much occasion, but maybe that would change. I could feel myself getting in touch with my “inner” mean streak.Dixie opened a sliding glass door and we passed out onto a spacious screened-in patio. The floor here was smooth stone, and the area was rimmed with a series of twenty-foot trees in enormous terracotta pots. The branches were filled with goldfinches, all twittering as they hopped from limb to limb. There was a grouping of upholstered patio furniture nearby, in addition to a glass-topped table and four thickly cushioned chairs. Everything looked spotless. I wondered where the little birdies dropped their tiny green and white turds.“This is actually a combination greenhouse and aviary. These are specimen plants, proteas and bromeliads. South American,” she said.I murmured “gorgeous” for lack of anything better. I thought a bromeliad was a remedy for acid indigestion. She gestured toward the conversational grouping of chairs. From somewhere, I could already smell dinner in the making. The scent of sautéed garlic and onion, like a sumptuous perfume, floated in the air. Maybe one of those no-name indentured servants would appear with a tray of eats, little tidbits of something I could fall on and snarf down without using my hands.As soon as we sat down, the man reappeared with drinks on his tray. He gave us each a tiny cloth napkin in case we urped something up. Dixie’s beverage of choice was a martini straight up in a forties-style glass. Four green olives were lined up on a toothpick like beads on an abacus. We each took a sip of our respective libations. My Chardonnay was delicate, with a long, slow, vanilla finish, probably nothing from a screw-top bottle at the neighborhood Stop ‘n’ Shop. I watched her hold the gin on her tongue like a communion ritual. She set the glass down with a faint tap and reached into her blazer pocket to extract a pack of cigarettes and a small gold lighter. She lit the cigarette, inhaling with a reverence that suggested smoking was another sacrament. When she caught me observing her, smoke she opened her mouth to emit a thick tongue of smoke that she then sucked up her nose. “You don’t smoke these days?”I shook my head. “I quit.”“Good for you. I’ll never give it up myself. All this talk about health is fairly tedious. You probably exercise, too.” She cocked her head in reflection, striking a bemused pose. “Let’s see. What’s in fashion at the moment? You lift weights,” she said, and pointed a finger in my direction.“I jog five days a week, too. Don’t forget that,” I said, and pointed back at her.She took another sip of her drink. “Stephie tells me you’re looking for Mickey. Has he disappeared?”“Not as far as I know, but I’d like to get in touch with him. The only number I have turns out to be a disconnect. Have you heard from him lately?”“Not for years,” she said. A smile formed on her lips, and she checked her fingernails. “That’s a curious question. I can’t believe you’d ask me. I’m sure there are other folks much more likely to know.”“Such as?”“Shack, for one. And who’s the other cop? Lit something. They were always thick as thieves.”“I just talked to Shack, which is how I got to you. Roy Littenberg died. I didn’t realize you and Eric were still in town.”She studied me for a moment through her cigarette smoke. Miss Dixie wasn’t dumb, and I could see her analyze the situation. “Where’s all this coming from?”“All what?”“You have something else in mind.”I reached down for my shoulder bag and removed the letter from the outside pocket. “Got your letter,” I said.“My letter,” she repeated blankly, her gaze fixed on the envelope.“The one you sent me in 1974,” I said. “Mickey tossed it in a box with some other mail that must have come the same day. He failed to deliver it, so I never read the letter until today.” For once, I seemed to have captured her full attention.“You’re not serious.”“I am.” I held up the letter like a paddle in a silent auction: My bid. “I had no idea you were balling my beloved husband. You want to talk about that?”She laughed and then caught herself. Her teeth were now as perfect as white horseshoes hinged together at the rear of her mouth. “Sorry. I’m sorry. I hope you won’t take offense, but you’re such a boob when it comes to men.”“Thanks. You know how I value your opinion.”“Nothing to be ashamed of. Most women don’t have the first clue about men.”“And you do?”“Of course.” Dixie studied me over the ribbon of cigarette smoke, taking my measure with her eyes. She paused and leaned forward to tap off a cylinder of ash into a cut-glass dish on the coffee table in front of her.“What’s your theory, Miss Dixie, if I may be so bold as to inquire?” I said, affecting a Southern accent.“Take advantage of them before they take advantage of you,” she said, her smile as thin as glass.“Nice. Romantic. I better write that down.” I pretended to make a note on the palm of my hand.“Well, it’s not nice but it’s practical. In case you haven’t noticed, most men don’t give a shit about romance. They want to get in your panties and let it go at that. What else can I say?”“That about covers it,” I said. “May I ask, why him? There were dozens of cops at the Honky-Tonk back then.” She hesitated, apparently considering what posture to affect. “He was very good,” she said, with a trace of a smile.“I didn’t ask for an evaluation. I’d like to know what went on.”“Why the attitude? You seem so, belligerent. In the end, you’d have left him anyway, so what do you care?”“Indulge me,” I said. “For the sake of argument.”She lifted one thin shoulder in a delicate shrug. “He and I were an item long before the two of you met. He broke it off for a while and then he came back. Why attach anything to it? We were not in love by any stretch. I might have admired him, but I can’t say I liked him much. He had a rough kind of charm, but then again, you know that. I wouldn’t even call it an affair in any true sense of the word. More like sexual addiction, a mutual service we performed. Or I should say, that’s what it was for me. I don’t know about him. It’s a question of pathology. He probably couldn’t help himself any more than I”“Oh, please. Don’t give me that horseshit about sexual addiction. What crap,” I said. “Did it ever occur to you that wedding vows mean something?”“Yours didn’t seem to mean much. Until death do us part? At least I’m still married, which is more than you can say. Or am I wrong about that? Rude of me. You might have married someone else and had a whole passel of kids. I would have asked before now, but I didn’t see a ring.”“Were you with him the night Benny Quintero died?”Her smiled faded. “Yes.” Flat. No hesitation, no emotion, and no elaboration.“Why didn’t he tell me?”“Did you really want to know?”“It would have helped. I’m not sure what I’d have done, but it might have made a difference.”“I doubt that. You were such a cocky little thing. Really, quite obnoxious. You knew it all back then. Mickey wanted you spared.”“And why is that?”“He was crazy about you. I’m surprised you’d have to ask.”“Given the fact he was screwing you,” I said.“You knew his history the day you married him. Did you seriously imagine he’d be monogamous.“Why’d you take it on yourself to tattle when Mickey asked you not to?”“I was afraid he’d get a raw deal, which he did, as It turns out.”“Did Eric know about Mickey?”There was the tiniest flicker of hesitation. “We’ve come to an accommodation.”“I’m not talking about now. Did he know back then?”She took a long, deliberate drag on her cigarette while she formed her reply. “Life was difficult for Eric. He had a hard time adjusting after he got back.”“In other words, no.”“There was no emotional content between Mickey and me. Why inflict unnecessary pain?”“How about so your respective spouses knew the truth about you? As long as there’s no love, as long as it’s simply sexual servicing, as you claim, why couldn’t you tell us?”She was silent, giving me a wide-eyed stare.“The question Isn’t hypothetical. I really want to know,” I said. “Why not be honest with us if your relationship meant so little?” I waited. “Okay, I’ll help. You want the answer? Try this. Because we’d have kicked your respective butts and put an end to it. I don’t know about Eric, but I have no tolerance for Infidelity.“Perhaps there are things about loyalty you never grasped,” she said.I closed my eyes briefly. I wanted to lift her front chair legs and flip her backward, just for the satisfaction of hearing her head thud against the stone floor. Instead, I silently recited what I remembered of the penal code: An assault is an unlawful attempt, coupled with a present ability, to commit a violent injury on the person of another.... A battery is any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another.I smiled. “You think it was okay to make fools of us? To gratify your whims at our expense? If you think that’s loyalty, you’re really fucked.”“You don’t have to be crude.”Someone spoke from the far side of the patio. “Excuse me. Dixie?”Both of us looked over. Stephie stood in the doorway.For once, Dixie seemed embarrassed, and the color rose in her cheeks. “Yes, Stephie. What is it?”“Ms. Yablonsky’s here. Did you want to talk to her now or should I reschedule?”Dixie exhaled with impatience, stubbing out her cigarette. “Have her wait in my office. I’ll be there in a minute.”“Sure. No problem.” Stephie closed the sliding glass door, watching for a moment before she moved away.“This has gone far enough,” Dixie said to me. “I can see you enjoy getting up on your high horse. You always liked claiming the moral high ground,”“I do. That’s correct. It’s mine to claim in this case.”“When you’ve finished your drink, you can let yourself out.”“Thanks. This was fun. You haven’t changed at all.”“Nor have you,” she said.
