---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_027.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["mark", "said", "duncan", "benny", "could", "laddie", "back", "duffy", "like", "see", "mickey", "one", "went", "tape", "left", "bag", "think", "louisville", "door", "make", "hand", "sure", "car", "knew", "light"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit027html

---


Unknown
TWENTY-SIXThe Bethels’ estate was on the outer edges of Montebello, perched on a bluff overlooking the Pacific Ocean. I’d spoken to Laddie on the phone and she’d given me directions to the house on Savanna Lane. Mark was out, but she said he’d be returning shortly. It worried me she hadn’t voiced greater surprise or curiosity about the reason for my call. I’d mentioned the trip to Louisville, that I had something to discuss, preferably with the two of them, though I’d certainly value the opportunity to talk to her alone first. If she was alarmed about such a conversation, she gave no indication.At seven on the dot, I pulled in at the gate. Detectives Claas and Aldo had followed me in their car, and they were parked in a grove of eucalyptus trees about a hundred yards off. I had the tape recorder in my bag, but I wasn’t wired for sound so there was no way they could monitor the conversation once I was inside the house. No one (meaning them) seemed to think this would present a problem since I’d be in the Bethels’ home with other people (meaning servants) on the premises. Our plan, if that’s what you want to call it, was for them to hover on the sidelines, failing in behind me when I left the estate. Then we’d go back to my place, listen to the tape, and see if what we’d picked up constituted probable cause. If so, we’d find a judge who could sign a warrant for Mark’s arrest on charges of assault with a deadly weapon and attempted murder in the shooting of Mickey Magruder. If not, we’d move to Plan B, on which we’d never quite agreed. On reflection, even Plan’ A seemed a bit half-assed, but I was there at the gate and I’d already pressed the button.I expected to hear someone on the intercom asking for my name. Instead, there was silence. The gates simply swung open, allowing me entrance. I waved to the “boys” and put the car in gear. The driveway was long, curving off to the left. The land on either side was barren except for the grasses bending under the offshore winds. Occasionally, a tree broke the line of the horizon, a stark silhouette against the milder dark of the sky. I could see the lighted windows of the house, dazzling yellow and white, set in a bulky block of dark stone. I parked out in front on an enormous apron of gravel. I shut off the engine and sat taking in the sight of the house through the driver’s side window.The structure was curiously reminiscent of Duncan Oaks’s house in Louisville. Despite the appearance of age, I knew construction had been completed only five years before, which might explain the absence of mature trees. The exterior was stone and stucco. Landscape lights washed the facade with its glaze of dusky pink underlaid with brown. In theory, the style was Mediterranean or Italianate, one of those bastard forms that Californians favor, but the arches above the windows seemed remarkably similar to their Kentucky counterpart. The front door was recessed, sheltered in a portico flanked by fluted columns. Even the balustrade was kindred in design. Was Laddie conscious of what she’d done or had she mimicked Duncan’s house inadvertently? What is it that prompts us to reenact our unresolved issues? We revisit our wounds, constructing the past in hopes that this time we can make the ending turn out right.The carriage lights on either side of the door came on. Reluctantly, I reached for my bag. I’d left the zippered compartment open, the tape recorder in easy range of my hand. I emerged from the car, crunched my way across the parking pad, and climbed the low front steps. Laddie opened the door before I had time to ring the bell. “Hello, Kinsey. How nice of you to drive all the way out here. I take it you had no trouble finding the place.”“Not at all. It’s beautiful.”“We like it,” she said mildly. “Can I take your jacket?”“This is fine for now. It’s cold.”She closed the door behind me. “Come on into the living room. I’ve got a nice fire burning. Will you have a drink? I’m having wine,” she said. She was already walking toward the living room, her heels clicking smartly against the highly polished marble floors.I followed her, saying, “I better not, but thanks. I had wine with dinner and that’s my limit.”We stepped down into the living room, with its twelve-foot coffered ceiling. One entire wall of French doors looked on to a patio. The room was surprisingly light, done in shades of cream: the twenty, by twenty four-foot rug, the walls, the three plump matching love seats arranged in a U in front of the fireplace. There were touches of black in the throw pillows and lampshades, Boston ferns providing spots of green here and there. Maybe I could snitch some ideas for my spacious abode. The coffee table was a square of three-quarter-inch glass resting on three enormous polished brass spheres. A second wineglass sat near a bottle of Chardonnay in an insulated cooler. Laddie’d made quite a dent for someone drinking alone. I flicked on the tape recorder during the momentary lull as she picked up her wineglass and settled on one of the sofas that flanked the fireplace. The hearth was a glossy black granite that reflected the blaze. Really, I was taking notes, I had to have one of those.I sat down opposite her, wondering how to begin. These transitions can be awkward, especially when you’re trying to shift the discussion from niceties to the subject of murder.She said, “What were you doing in Louisville? We used to go for the Derby, but it’s been ages.”A maid came to the door. “I left Mr. Bethel’s plate in the warming oven. Will there be anything else?”“No, dear. That’s fine. We’ll see you in the morning,”“Yes, ma’am,” the woman said, and then withdrew.I said, “Actually, I went to Louisville on a research trip. Do you remember Benny Quintero, the fellow who was killed here a few years ago?”“Of course. Mark represented Mickey.”“Well, as it happens, Benny was from Louisville. He went to Manual the same time you were at Louisville Male High.”Her lips parted in expectation. “What kind of research was this? I can’t imagine.”“I keep thinking there’s a connection between Benny Quintero’s death and Mickey’s being shot last week.”Laddie’s frown was delicate. “That’s quite a leap.”“Not really,” I said, “though it does seem odd. Here the four of you come from the same hometown.”“Four?”“Sure. You, Mark, Benny, and Duncan Oaks. You remember Duncan,” I said.“Of course, but he’s been gone for years.“My point exactly,” I said. Gee, this was going better than I’d thought. “During his stint in Vietnam, Mark was at la Drang, right?”“You’d have to verify that with him, but I believe so.”“Turns out Benny was there too.Laddie blinked. “I’m not following. What does any of this have to do with me?”“Let me back up a step. Didn’t Duncan Oaks interview you for the Louisville Tribune?”She said, “Kinsey, what is this? I don’t mean to be rude, but you’re skipping back and forth and I’m confused. I really don’t see the relevance.”“Just hear me out,” I said. “Duncan was doing a series for the local paper. He interviewed army wives, like you, who’d been left behind, you know, talking about the war from their perspective. His idea was to tell the same story through the eyes of the husbands off fighting in Vietnam.”Laddie shook her head, shrugging. “I guess I’ll have to take your word for it.”“At any rate, he did talk to you.”She took a sip of wine. “It’s possible. I don’t remember.”“Don’t worry about the date. I’ve asked his editor to send a copy of the article. We can pin it down from that. Anyway, Duncan’s editor says he flew to Vietnam in September of ’65. He ran into Mark and Benny at la Drang, which was where Duncan disappeared.” I was doling out pure theory, but I noticed she’d stopped offering much in the way of objections. “Seven years later Benny shows up in Santa Teresa with Duncan Oaks’s ID. The next thing you know, Benny’s been murdered. You see the link?”“Benny wasn’t murdered. You’re overstating the situation. As I remember, Benny had a subdural hematoma, and his death was the result of an arterial bleed. Given the nature of his injury, it could have happened any time. Even the coroner’s report said that.”“Really? You’re probably right. You have quite a memory for the details,” I said.“Mark and I discussed it at the time. I suppose it stuck in my mind.”“Mickey’s another link. He went off to Louisville on Thursday, May eighth. He came back on Monday, and in the wee hours of Wednesday morning he was shot, as you know.”Laddie’s smile was thin. “Not to sound superior, but you’re committing what’s called a post hoc fallacy. Just because one event follows another doesn’t mean there’s a cause-and-effect relationship.”“I see. In other words, just because Benny knew something doesn’t mean he died for it.”“Is this what you wanted to discuss with Mark?”“In part.”“Then let’s leave that. I’m sure it’s more appropriate to wait till he comes in.”I said, “Fine. Could we talk about your relationship with Duncan?”“I’d hardly call it a relationship. I knew him, of course. We went all through school together.”“Were you pals, confidants, boyfriend/girlfriend?”“We were friends, that’s all. There was never anything between us, if that’s what you’re getting at.”“Actually, it is,” I said. “I thought since you were the king and queen of the senior prom, you might have been sweet on each other.”Laddie smiled, her composure restored. This was something she’d thought about; her version of the story was preassembled and prepackaged. “Duncan wasn’t interested in me romantically, nor I in him.”“Too bad. He looked cute.”“He was cute. He was also extremely narcissistic, which I found obnoxious. There’s nothing worse than a seventeen-year-old kid who thinks he’s hot stuff.”“You don’t think he was charismatic?”“He thought he was,” she said. “I thought he was conceited, nice, funny, but such a snob.”“What about your father?”She looked at me askance. “My father? What’s he have to do with this?”“This is peripheral and probably none of my business,”“None of this is your business,” she said, bridling.I smiled to show I hadn’t taken offense. “I was told he was awarded a patent that earned him a lot of money. I gather, before that, he was considered a bit eccentric.”“If he was, so what? Make your point.”“I’m just thinking his fortune must have changed people’s perception of you. Duncan’s, in particular.”She was silent.“Yes? No?”“I suppose,” she said.“You went from being one down to one up where he was concerned. He sounds like the type who enjoyed a conquest, to prove he could do it, if nothing else.”“Are you trying to build a case for something?”“I’m just trying to get a feel for what kind of guy he was.”“A dead one.”“Before that. You never had a fling with him?”“Oh, please. Don’t be silly. We never had an affair.”“Hey, an affair is six weeks or more. A fling can be anything from one night to half a dozen.”“I never had a fling with him, either.”“When did Mark leave for Vietnam? I know you married him in June. His orders came through......“July twenty-sixth,” she said, biting off the words.“The way I read the situation, Duncan was in Louisville after Mark shipped out. There you were, a young newlywed with a husband off at war. I’m sure you were lonely, needy....”“This is offensive. You’re being extremely insulting, not only to me but to Mark.”“Insulting about what?” Mark said from the corridor. He shrugged out of his overcoat and tossed it over the back of a chair. He must have come in through the kitchen. His high forehead and receding hairline gave him an air of innocence, the same look babies have before they learn to bite and talk back. Laddie got up to greet him. I watched the two of them as he bussed her cheek.He said, “Hang on a minute while I make a quick call.” He crossed to the phone and dialed 9-1-1.Laddie said, “What’s going on?”Mark raised a finger to indicate the dispatcher had picked up. “Hi, this is Mark Bethel. I’m at Four-fortyeight Savanna Lane. I’ve got a couple of guys parked in a car near the entrance to my gate. Could you have A patrol car cruise by? I really don’t like the looks of them.... Thanks. I’d appreciate that.” He replaced the handset and turned to Laddie and me with a shake of his head. “Probably harmless, a lovers’ tryst, but just on the off chance they’re casing the place..” He rubbed his palms together. “I could use a glass of wine.”I tried to picture Detectives Claas and Aldo busted by the local cops on a morals charge.Laddie poured Chardonnay in a glass, holding it by the stem so as not to smudge the bowl. The trembling of her hand caused the wine to wobble in the glass.Mark didn’t seem to notice. He took the glass and sat down, giving me his full attention. “I hope I didn’t interrupt.”“We were talking about Benny Quintero,” Laddie said. “She’s just back from Louisville, where she did some research.”“Benny. Poor guy.”I said, “I didn’t realize you were all from the same town.”“Well, that’s not strictly true. I was born in Dayton. My family moved to Louisville when I was six. I lived there till I went off to U of K.”“And you knew Benny then?”“I knew of him, just as he must have known about me from football games.”“I didn’t realize you played football.”“More or less,” he said ruefully. “I went to Atherton, which was all girls for years. School didn’t go coed until 1954. Even then, we seldom won a game against Manual or Male. Mostly, the players knew each other by reputation. I remember there was a guy named Byck Snell at Eastern..”“So Benny came to California and looked you up,” I said.“Right. He must have heard I was a lawyer and somehow got it in his head I could help him with his VA benefits. I mean, it’s like I told him: just because I’m an attorney doesn’t make me an expert. In those days, I knew next to nothing about the Veterans Administration. Now, of course, I’m educating myself on the issues because I can see what a difference I can make,”I said, “Sounds like a campaign speech.”Mark smiled. “Sorry. At any rate, I couldn’t seem to convince Benny of my ignorance. The whole thing was ludicrous, but I couldn’t get him off it. The guy started stalking me, appeared at the office, appeared at the house. The phone started ringing at all hours of the night. Laddie was getting nervous, and I couldn’t blame her. That’s when I asked Mickey to step in and see what he could do.”“Meaning what?”I could see him hesitate. “Well, you know, Mickey was a tough guy. I thought he could put the fear of God in him. I’m not saying Mickey meant to hurt him, but he did make threats.”“When?”“During the incident in the Honky-Tonk parking lot.”“You talked to Benny after that?”“Sure. He called me and he was furious. I said I’d talk to Mickey. I made a few calls but never managed to track him down, as you well know.”“Because he and Dixie were together,” I said, helping him along.“So they claimed. Frankly, I’ve always wondered. It seemed pretty damn convenient under the circumstances.”“So you’re saying Mickey went back to Benny and beat the shit out of him.”“I’m saying it’s possible. Mickey always had a temper. He hated it when some punk got the best of him.”“I hardly think Benny got the best of him. Shack says it was a shoving match with no blows exchanged.”“Well, that’s true. Actually, I heard the same report from the other witnesses. The point is, Mickey came off looking bad, and for a guy like him that’s worse.”“You know, this is the second time you’ve implicated Mickey.”“Hey, I’m sorry, but you asked.”“Why didn’t you ever mention you knew Benny back in high school?”“When did I have the chance? In those days, you barely spoke to me. And since then, believe me, I’ve been acutely aware you’re not a fan of mine. We run into each other in public, you practically duck and hide, you’re so anxious to avoid contact. Anyway, that aside, you weren’t speaking to Mickey either, or he’d have told you the same thing.”I felt myself color at his accuracy. And here I thought I was so subtle. “Can I ask one more thing?”“What’s that?” Mark took a sip of his drink.“After you Joined the army, you were sent to Vietnam. Is that correct?”“Absolutely. I’m proud of my service record.”“I’m sure you are,” I said. “Benny Quintero was there and so was Duncan Oaks.” I went on, giving him a hasty summation of what I’d learned from Porter Yount.Mark’s face took on the look of a man who’s trying to pay attention while his mind is somewhere else. I could tell he was thinking hard, composing his response before I’d finished what I was saying. His resulting smile held an element of puzzlement. “You have to understand there were hundreds of guys who fought at la Drang. The one/five, the one/seven, the two/seven, the Second Battalion Nineteenth Artillery, the Two-twenty-seventh Assault Helicopter Battalion, the Eighth Engineer Battalion,”“Got it,” I said. “There were lots of guys. I got that, but Duncan was a journalist and he went out there specifically to talk to you because of the series he was writing. He must have told you he talked to Laddie. My guess is you’d felt threatened by him for years. He and Laddie were tight. She was poor in those days and never good enough for him, but I’ll bet her classmates would tell me she’d had a crush on him, that she’d have given her eyeteeth for his attention,”“That’s absurd. That’s ridiculous,” Laddie interjected.Mark made a motion with his hand that told her to hush, the sort of command you teach a dog in obedience training. She closed her mouth, but the significance of the gesture wasn’t lost on her. Mark was clearly annoyed. “Let’s get to the bottom line. What are you suggesting?”“I’m suggesting the three of you connected up. You and Benny and Duncan Oaks.”Mark was shaking his head. “No. Wrong.”I said, “Yes. Right. I have a snapshot of the two of them, and you’re visible in the background.”Laddie said, “So what?”“I’ll take care of this,” he said to her. And then to me, “Go on. This is fascinating. Clearly, you’ve cooked up some theory and you’re trying to make the pieces fit.”“I know how they fit. Duncan interviewed Laddie for the paper after you shipped out. By then, her daddy had money and Duncan couldn’t resist. After all, a conquest is a conquest, however late it comes. The two had a fling and you found out about it. Either she ‘fessed up or he told you himself,”Laddie said, “I don’t want to talk about this. It’s over and done. I made a mistake, but it was years ago.”“Yeah, and I know who paid,” I said caustically.“Laddie, for God’s sake, would you shut your mouth!” He turned back to me again, his face dark. “And?”“And you killed him. Benny Quintero saw it and that’s why he was hounding you. You set Mickey up. You killed Benny and made sure Mickey took the rap for it.”Mark’s tone was light, but it wasn’t sincere. “And you’re saying what, that I shot Mickey too?”“Yes.”He held his hands out, baffled. “Why would I do that?”“Because he’d put it together the same way I have.”“Wait a minute, Kinsey. Duncan’s body was never found, so for all you know he’s alive and well. You think you can make a charge like this without evidence?”“I have the snapshot. That helps.”“Oh, that’s right. The snapshot. What crap. I think I better call your bluff. You have it with you?”“I left it with a friend.”Mark snapped his fingers. “I forgot about Benny’s brother. What’s his name again? Duffy. Carlin Duffy. Now, there’s a bright guy.”I said nothing.He went on. “My sources tell me he’s living in a shack at Himes Nursery. With his criminal history, it should be easy enough to put the screws to him.”“I thought you weren’t worried.”“Call it cleanup,” he said.“Really. Now that you’re running for public office, you have to bury your misdeeds, make sure the past won’t rise up and bite you in the butt when you’re least expecting it.”He pointed at me. “Bingo.”“Did you hate him that much?”“Duncan? I’ll tell you what pissed me off about that guy. Not so much that he screwed Laddie the minute my back was turned, but he showed up at la Drang, trying to pass himself off as a grunt. I had buddies, good friends, young guys, who died with valor, brave men who believed in what we were doing. I saw them die in agony, maimed and mutilated, limbs gone, gut-shot. Duncan Oaks was a sleaze. He had money and pretensions but not an ounce of decency. He deserved to die, and I was happy to help him out. Speaking of which, I’d like to have his personal effects.”“Effects?”“Press pass, dog tags.”“I can’t help you there. You’d have to talk to Duffy about those things.”From the depths of my shoulder bag, there was a small but distinct click as the tape ran out and the recorder shut itself off. Mark’s gaze flicked down and then flicked up to my face. His smile faded, and I heard Laddie’s sharp intake of breath. He held his hand out. “You want to give me that?”“Hey, Dad?”The three of us turned in unison. The Bethels’ son, Malcolm, was standing in the door to the dining room.“What is it?” Mark said, trying not to sound impatient with the kid.“Can I take your Mercedes? I’ve got a date.”“Of course.”Malcolm continued to stand there. “I need the keys.”“Well, get a move on. We’re in the middle of a conversation here,” Mark said, waving him into the room.Malcolm shot me a look of embarrassment as he entered the room. Impatiently, Mark removed his keys from his pocket, twisting the key from the ring as he separated it from the others. Meanwhile, I was staring at the kid. No wonder the photographs of Duncan Oaks had seemed familiar. I’d seen him, or his incarnation, in Laddie’s son. The same youth, the same dark, distinctly handsome looks. Malcolm, at twenty, was the perfect blend of Duncan at seventeen and Duncan at twenty-three. I turned to Laddie, who must have known the final piece of the puzzle had fallen into place.She said, “Mark.” He glanced at her, and the two exchanged a quick piece of nonverbal communication.“Where’re you off to, Malcolm?” I said, ever the chipper one.“I’m taking my girlfriend to a kegger out on campus.”“Great. I’m just leaving. I think I’ll follow you out. I got lost coming in. Could you steer me in the right direction?”“Sure, no problem. I’ll be happy to,” he said.I kept a careful eye on the rear of Mark Bethel’s black Mercedes as Malcolm drove slowly down the driveway ahead of me. In my rearview mirror, I saw another set of headlights come into view. Mark had apparently made a scramble for Laddie’s BMW, a sporty red model perfect for a hit-and-run fatality or a high-speed chase. In front of me, Malcolm had just reached the gates, triggering the automatic mechanism buried in the drive. Slowly, the gates swung open. Out on the road, I spotted two Santa Teresa Sheriff’s Department cars pulled onto the berm, lights flashing. Four deputies were in conversation with Detectives Claas and Aldo, who were just in the process of identifying themselves. Malcolm turned left onto Savanna and I followed in his wake. Detective Aldo caught my eye, but there was no way he could help until the deputies had finished with them. So much for Plan A.I checked the rearview mirror. Mark was so close on my tail, I could see the smirk on his face. I hugged the back end of the Mercedes, figuring Mark wouldn’t ram me or shoot as long as Malcolm was close by. Maybe I’d accompany Malcolm and his girlfriend to the kegger out on campus, have a beer, shoot the shit, anything to avoid Mark. We passed a cemetery on the left and slowed at the intersection by the bird refuge. Malcolm tapped his horn and gave a final wave, turning left on Cabana while I turned right and headed for the freeway.I took the 101 north, keeping my speed at a steady 60 mph. I could see Mark keeping pace. Traffic was light. Not a cop on the road. I groped through my bag, fumbling among the contents with one hand while I steered with the other. I popped the used tape out, leaned over and opened the glove compartment, tossed the tape in, and closed it. I pulled a fresh cassette from the packet on the passenger seat and inserted It in the tape recorder. I didn’t have my gun. I’m a private investigator, not a vigilante. Most of my work takes place in the public library or the hall of records. Generally speaking, these places aren’t dangerous, and I seldom need a semi-automatic to protect myself.Now what? I had, of course, invented the bit about Mark’s being in the snapshot, visible as a backdrop to Duncan and Benny’s reunion. If such a picture existed, it certainly wasn’t in my hands, or Duffy’s, for that matter. I winced. The very notion had put Mark on a tear, thinking we had evidence of their association. Big damn deal. Even if we had such a picture, what would that prove? I should have kept my mouth shut. Poor Duffy didn’t have a clue as to what misery was bearing down on him. The last time I’d seen him he was drunk as a coot, passed out on his cot.I took the Peterson off-ramp and turned left at the light. I didn’t bother to speed up or make any tricky moves. Mark didn’t seem to be in any hurry either. He knew where I was going, and if I went somewhere else, he’d go to Himes anyway. I think he liked the idea of this slow-paced pursuit, catching up at his leisure while I was frantically casting about for help. I turned right onto the side street and right again into the nursery parking lot. Mine was the only car. The garden center was closed. The building’s interior was dim except for a light here and there to discourage the odd burglar with a green thumb or an urge for potted plants. The rest of the acreage was blanketed in darkness.I parked, locked the car, and headed off on foot. I confess I ran, having given up all pretense of being casual about these things. Glancing back, I could see the headlights of the Beamer as it eased into the lot. I was waiting for the sound of the car door slamming, but Mark had bumped his way across the low concrete barrier and was driving down the wide lanes between the crated trees. I cut back and forth, holding my shoulder bag against me to keep it from jostling as I increased my pace. Idly, I realized the maze of boxed trees had shifted. Lanes I remembered from earlier were gone or rotated on an axis, now shooting off on parallel routes. I wasn’t sure if trees had been added, subtracted, or simply rearranged. Maybe Himes had a landscape project that required a half-grown arbor.I yelled Duffy’s name, hoping to alert him in advance of my arrival, but the sound seemed to be absorbed by the portable forest that surrounded me.Mark was still barreling along behind me, but at least the narrow twists and turns were slowing him down. I felt like I was stoned, everything moving at half. speed-including me. I reached the maintenance shed, heart thumping, breath ragged. The yellow forklift was now blocking the lane, parked beside the shed with a crated fifteen-foot tree hoisted on the forks. The shed door was open and a pale light spilled out on the path like water.“Duffy?” I called.The lights were on in his makeshift tent, but there was no sign of him. His shoes were missing and the blanket I’d laid over him was now crumpled on the floor. A cheap saucepan sat on the hot plate filled with a beige sludge that looked like refried beans. A plastic packet of flour tortillas sat, unopened, on the unused burner. The pan still felt warm so maybe he’d stepped out to take a leak. I heard the BMW skid to a halt.“Duffy!”I checked the top of the orange crate. Duncan Oaks’s press pass, his dog tags, and the snapshot were still lying where I’d left them. Outside, I heard the car door slam, the sound of someone thumping in my direction. I gathered Duncan’s things in haste, looking for a place to hide them before Bethel appeared. Quickly, I considered and discarded the idea of hiding the items in Duffy’s clothes. The shed itself was crude, with little in the way of furniture and no nooks or crannies. In the absence of insulation, I was looking at bare studs, not so much as a toolbox where I could stash the stuff. I shoved the items in my back pocket just as Mark appeared in the doorway, a gun in his hand.“Oh, shit,” I said.“I’d appreciate your handing me the tape recorder and the tape.”“No problem,” I said. I reached in my shoulder bag, took out the tape recorder, and held it out to him. While I watched, he tucked the tape recorder up against his body, pressed the EJECT button with his free hand, and extracted the cassette. He dropped the tape recorder on the dirt floor and crushed it with his foot. Behind him, I caught a flicker of movement. Duffy appeared in the doorway and then eased back out of sight.“I don’t get it,” I said. I focused on Mark, making sure I didn’t telegraph Duffy’s presence with my eyes.“Get what?” Mark was distracted. He tried to keep his eyes pinned on me while he held the gun and cassette in one hand and unraveled the tape with the other, pulling off the reel. Loops of thin, shiny ribbon were tangled in his fingers, trailing to the floor in places.“I don’t understand what you’re so worried about. There’s nothing on there that would incriminate you.”“I can’t be sure what Laddie said before I showed.”“She was the soul of discretion,” I said dryly.Mark smiled in spite of himself. “What a champ.”“Why’d you kill Benny?”“To get him off my back. What’d you think?”“Because he knew you killed Duncan?”“Because he saw me do it.”“Just like that?”“Just like that. Call it a flash of inspiration. Six of us were loaded with the body bags. Duncan was pissing and moaning, but I could tell he wasn’t hurt bad. Fuckin’ baby. Before we could lift off, the medic was killed by machine-gun fire. Benny seemed to be out of it. I’d been shot in the leg, and I’d taken a load of shrapnel in my back and side. Up we went. I remember the chopper shuddering, and I didn’t think we’d make it under all the small arms fire. The minute we were airborne, I crawled over to Duncan, stripped him of his ID, ripped the tags off his neck, and tossed ‘ern aside. All the time the chopper lurched and vibrated like a crazy man was shaking it back and forth. Duncan lay there looking at me, but I don’t think he fully understood what I was doing until I hoisted him out. Benny saw me, the shit. He pretended he’d passed out, but he saw the whole deal. By then, I was light-headed and rolled over on my side, sick with sweat. That’s when Benny took the tags and hid ‘ern...“I take it he pressed you too hard.”“Hey, I did what I could for him. In the end, I killed him as much for being dumb as trying to screw me over when he should have left well enough alone.”“And Mickey?”“Let’s cut the chitchat and get on with this.” He snapped his fingers, pointing to the bag.“I don’t have a gun.”“It’s Duncan’s tags I want.”“I left the stuff sitting on the orange crate. Duffy must have taken it.”Mark snapped his fingers, gesturing for me to hand him the bag.“I lied about the snapshot.”“GIVE ME THE FUCKIN’ BAG!”I passed him my shoulder bag and watched while he searched. His holding the gun necessitated working with the bag clamped against his chest. This made it tricky to inspect the interior while he kept an eye on me. Impatiently, he tipped the bag upside down, dumping out the contents. Somewhere nearby, I heard the low rumble of heavy equipment and I found myself praying, Please, please, please.Mark heard it too. He tossed the bag to one side and motioned with the gun, indicating I should leave before him. I was suddenly afraid. While we talked, while we stood face-to-face, I didn’t believe he’d kill me because I didn’t think he’d have the nerve. My own fate had seemed curiously out of my hands. What mattered at that point was knowing the truth, finding out what had happened to Duncan and Benny and Mick. Now the act of turning my back was almost more than I could bear.I moved toward the door. I could hear the deep growl of a diesel motor, some piece of machinery picking up speed as it advanced. My skin felt radiant. Anxiety snaked through my gut like summer lightning. I yearned to see what Mark was doing. I wondered if the gun was pointed at my back, wondered if he was, even then, in the process of releasing the safety, tightening his index finger on the trigger, speeding me to my death. Most of all, I wondered if the bullet would hit me before I heard the sound of the shot.I heard the crack of sudden impact and glanced back, watching with astonishment as the shed wall blew in, boards splintering on contact as the tractor plowed through. Duffy’s cot was crushed under the rolling track, which seemed to have the weight and destructive power of a moving tank. The front-mounted bucket banged into the space heater and sent it flying in my direction. I ducked my head, but the heater caught me in the back with an impetus that knocked me to my knees. As I scrambled to my feet, I looked over my shoulder. The entire rear wall of the shed had been demolished.Duffy threw the tractor in reverse and backed out of the flattened structure, doing a three-point turn. I ran, emerging from the shed in time to see Mark jump into the BMW and jam the key in the ignition. The engine ground ineffectually, but never coughed to life. Duffy, in the tractor, bore down on the vehicle. From the grin on his face, I had to guess he’d disabled the engine. Mark took aim and fired at Duffy, perched high in the tractor cab. I was caught between the two men, and I paused, mesmerized by the violence unfolding. My heart burned in my chest and the urge to run was almost overpowering. I could see that Mark was corralled in the cul-de-sac formed by the wreckage of the shed, a row of crated trees, and the tractor, which was picking up speed again as Duffy accelerated. I was blocking his only avenue of escape.Mark started running in my direction, apparently hoping to blow by me in his bid for freedom. He fired at Duffy again and the bullet zinged off the cab with a musical note. Duffy worked the lever that controlled the lift arm as the tractor bore down on him. I started running at Mark. He veered off at the last minute, reversing himself. He jumped up on one of the crates, hoping to crash through the trees to the aisle just behind. I caught him midair and shoved him. He bungled the leap, toppled backward, and fell on me. We went down in a heap. As he scuttled to his feet, I reached out and snagged his ankle, holding on for dear life. He staggered, half-dragging me into Duffy’s path. Duffy stomped on the accelerator. I released Mark and rolled sideways. The tractor lurched forward, diesel engine rumbling, the bucket lever screeching as Duffy maneuvered it. Mark pivoted, trying to launch himself in the opposite direction, but Duffy bore down on him, the bucket extended like a cradle. Mark turned to face the tractor, gauging its momentum in hopes of dodging its mass. He fired another round, but it clanged harmlessly off the bucket. He’d badly misjudged Duffy’s skill. The metal lip banged into Mark’s chest with an impact that nearly lifted him off his feet, driving him back against the side wall of the shed. For a moment, he hung there, pinned between the bucket and the wall. He struggled, his weight pulling him down until the lip of the bucket rested squarely against his throat. Duffy looked over at me, and I could see his expression soften. He propelled the tractor forward, and Mark’s neatly severed head thumped into the bucket like a cantaloupe.It wasn’t quite Plan B, but it would have to do.
