---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_019.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["like", "black", "know", "mark", "room", "said", "probably", "way", "another", "door", "get", "see", "eric", "one", "laddie", "dixie", "right", "glass", "thing", "could", "set", "thought", "much", "long", "time"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit019html

---


Unknown
EIGHTEENI drove into the parking area at the Hightowers’ estate shortly after 6 P.M. The house was ablaze, though it wouldn’t be dark for another hour yet. The evening was cool, 6 degrees, according to the report on my car radio. I parked my 1974 VW between a low-slung red Jaguar and a boxy chrome-trimmed black Rolls, where it sat looking faintly plaintive, a baby humpback whale swimming gamely among a school of sharks. In a final moment of cunning, I’d solved my fashion dilemma with the following: black flats, black tights, a very short black skirt, and a long-sleeved black T-shirt. I’d even applied a touch of makeup: powder, lip gloss, and a smudgy line of black along my lashes.A middle-aged white maid in a black uniform answered the door chimes and ushered me into the foyer, where she offered to take my bag. I declined, preferring to retain it on the off chance I’d spy the perfect opportunity to flee the premises. I could hear a smattering of conversation, interspersed with the kind of laughter that suggests lengthy and unrestrained access to booze. The maid murmured a discreet directive and began to cross the living room in her especially silent maid’s shoes. I followed her through the dining room and out into the screened atrium, where some fifteen to twenty people were already standing about with their drinks and cocktail napkins. A serving wench was circulating with a tray of hors d’oeuvres: teeny-weeny one-bite lamb chops with paper panties on the ends.As is typical of California parties, there was a percentage of people dressed far better than I and a percentage dressed like bums. The very rich seem particularly practiced at the latter, wearing baggy chinos, shapeless cotton shirts, and deck shoes with no socks. The not-so-very-rich have to work a little harder, adding an abundance of gold jewelry that might or might not be fake. I tucked my bag against the wall behind a nearby chair and then stood where I was, hoping to get my bearings before the panic set in. I didn’t know a soul and I was already flirting with the urge to escape. If I didn’t see Eric or Dixie in the next twenty seconds, I’d ease right on out.A black waiter in a white jacket appeared at my shoulder and asked ‘if I’d like a drink. He was tall and freckle-faced, somewhere in his forties, his tone refined, his expression remote. His name tag said STEWART. I wondered what he thought of the Montebello social set and sincerely hoped he wouldn’t take me for one of them. On second thought, there probably wasn’t too much danger of that.“Could I have Chardonnay?”“Certainly. We’re pouring Kistler, Sonoma-Cutrer, and a Beringer Private Reserve.”“Surprise me,” I said, and then I tilted my head. “Don’t I know you from somewhere?”“Rosie’s. Most Sundays.”I pointed in recognition. “Third booth back. You’re usually reading a book.”“That’s right. I work two jobs at the moment, and Sunday’s the only day I have to myself. I got three kids in college and a fourth going off next year. By 1991, I’ll be a free man again.”“What’s the other job?”“Telephone sales. I have a friend owns the company, and he lets me fill in when it suits my scheduling. His turnover’s fast anyway, and I’m good at the spiel. I’ll be back in a moment. Don’t you go away.”“I’ll be here.”Halfway across the room I caught sight of Mark Bethel in conversation with Eric, hunkered beside Eric’s wheelchair. Eric had his back to me; Mark was just to the left of him and facing my way. Mark’s face was long and his hairline was receding, which gave him a high-domed head with a wide expanse of brow. He wore glasses with tortoise-shell rims, behind which his eyes were a luminous gray. While technically not good-looking, the television cameras were amazingly kind to him. He’d removed his suit coat and, as I watched, I saw him loosen his tie and roll up the sleeves of his crisp white dress shirt. The gesture suggested that despite his buttoned-down appearance he was ready to go to work for his constituents. It was the sort of soft-focus image that would probably show up later in one of his commercials. The thrust of his campaign was shamelessly orchestrated: babies and old folk and the American flag waving over patriotic music. His opponents were portrayed in grainy black-and-white, overlaid with tabloid-type headlines decrying their perfidy. Mentally, I slapped myself around some for being such a cynic. Mark’s wife, Laddie, and his son, Malcolm, were standing a few feet away, chatting with another couple.Laddie was the exemplary political mate: mild, compassionate, so subtle in her affect that most people never guessed the power she held. Her eyes were a cool hazel, her dark hair streaked blond, probably to disguise any early hints of gray. Her nose was slightly too prominent, which saved her from perfection and thus endeared her to some extent. Never compelled to work, she’d devoted her time to a number of worthy causes, the symphony, the humane society, the arts council, and numerous charities. As hers was one of the few familiar faces present, I considered crossing the room and engaging her in conversation. I knew she’d at least pretend to be attentive, even if she couldn’t quite remember who I was.Malcolm, in another five years, was going to be a knockout. Even now, he was graced with a certain boy beauty: dark-haired and dark-eyed, with a succulent mouth and slouching, lazy posture. I’m a sucker for the type, though I tend to be careful about guys that good-looking as they often turn out to be treacherous. He seemed to have an awareness of the ladies, who were, likewise, more than casually aware of him. He wore desert boots, faded jeans, a pale blue dress shirt, and a navy blazer. He seemed poised, at ease, accustomed to attending parties given by his parents’ snooty friends. He looked like a stockbroker in the making, maybe a commodities analyst. He’d end up on financial-channel talk shows, discussing shortfalls, emerging markets, and aggressive growth. Once off the air, the female anchor, ever bullish, would pursue him over drinks and then fuck his baby brains out, strictly no-load with no penalty for early withdrawal.“Excuse me, dear.”I turned. The woman to my right handed me her empty glass, which I took without thinking. While she was clearly speaking in my direction, she managed to address me without direct eye contact. She was a gaunt and gorgeous fifty with a long flawless face and blown-about red hair. She wore a long-sleeved black silk body suit and blue jeans so tight I was surprised she could draw breath. With her flat tummy, tiny waist, and minuscule hips, my guess was she’d had sufficient liposuction to create an entire separate human being. “I need a refill. Gin and tonic. Make it Bombay Sapphire and no ice this round, please.”“Bombay Sapphire. No ice.”She leaned closer. “Darling, where’s the nearest loo? I’m about to pee my pants.”“The loo? Let’s see.” I pointed toward the sliding glass doors that opened into the dining room. “Through those glass doors. Angle left. The first door on your right.”“Thanks ever so.I set her empty glass in a potted palm, watching as she tottered away on her four-inch heels. She did as directed, passing through the glass doors to the dining room. She angled left to the first door, tilted her head, tapped lightly, turned the knob, and went in. Turned out to be a linen closet, so she walked right out again, looking mildly embarrassed and thoroughly confused. She spotted another door and corrected for her error with a quick look-around to see if anyone had noticed. She knocked and went in, then did an about-face, emerging from a closet filled with stereo equipment. Well, darn. I guess I know as much about the loo as I do about high-priced gins.I eased my way through the crowd, intercepting Stewart, who was returning with my wine. The next time I saw the woman, she avoided me altogether, but she’d probably drop a hint to Dixie about having me removed. In the meantime, a young woman appeared with another tray of hors d’oeuvres, this time halved new potatoes the size of fifty-cent pieces, topped with a dollop of sour cream and an anthill of black caviar. Within minutes, everybody’s breath was going to smell like fish.Eric’s conversation with Mark had come to an end. Across the room, I caught Mark’s attention and he moved in my direction, pausing to shake a few hands en route. By the time he finally reached me, his public expression had been replaced by a look of genuine concern. “Kinsey. Terrific. I thought that was you. I’ve been trying to reach you,” he said. “When’d you get here?”“A few minutes ago. I figured we’d connect.”“Well, we don’t have long. Laddie committed us to another party and we’re just about to leave. Judy passed along the news about Mickey. What a terrible thing. How’s he doing?”“Not well.”Mark shook his head. “What a shitty world we live in. It’s not like he didn’t have enough problems.”“Judy said you talked to him in March.”“That’s right. He asked me for help, in a roundabout way. You know how he is. By the way, I did talk to Detective Claas while I was down in L. A., though I didn’t learn much. They’re being very tight-lipped.”“I’ll say. They certainly don’t appreciate my presence on the scene.”“So I hear.”I could just imagine the earful he picked up from the LAPD. I said, “At this point, what worries me are Mickey’s medical bills. As far as I can tell, he lost all his coverage when he was fired from his job.”“I’m sure that’s not an issue. His bills can be paid from funds from Victims of Major Crimes, through the Da’s office. It’s probably been set in motion, but I’ll be happy to check. By the way, I stopped off at Mickey’s on my way back from L. A. I thought I should meet his landlady in case a question came up.”“Oh, great. Because the other thing I’m concerned about is his eviction. The sheriff’s already been there and changed the locks.”“I gathered as much,” he said. “Frankly, I’m surprised to see you take an interest. I was under the impression you hadn’t spoken to him for years.”“I haven’t, but it looks like I owe him one.”“How so?”“You know I blamed him for Benny Quintero’s death. Now I find out Mickey was with Dixie that night.“I heard that story too, but I was never sure how much credit to attach.”“You’re telling me they lied?”“Who’s to say? I’ve made it my practice not to speculate. Mickey didn’t confide and I didn’t press him for information. Fortunately, we never had to defend the point one way or the other.”I saw him glance in Laddie’s direction, gauging their departure, which was imminent. Laddie had, found Dixie and she was proffering regrets. Hugs, air kisses, and niceties were exchanged.Mark said, “I better catch up. Give me a couple of days. I’ll let you know about his bills. Glad we had a chance to chat.” He gave my shoulder a squeeze and then joined Laddie and Malcolm, who were waiting in the dining room. Dixie followed them out, apparently intending to see them as far as the door.Meanwhile, Eric had wheeled around and his face seemed to brighten at the sight of me. He pointed to a corner chair and then pushed himself in that direction. I nodded and followed, admiring his physique. His knit shirt fit snugly, emphasizing his shoulders and chest, along with his muscular arms. He looked like an ad for a fitness supplement. When he pivoted his chair, I could see the point where his thighs ended, six inches above the knees. He held a hand out to me. I leaned down and bussed his cheek before I took a seat. His aftershave was citrus and his skin was like satin. He said, “I didn’t think you’d come.”“I probably won’t stay long. I don’t know a soul here except for Mark and his crew. The kid’s attractive.”“And bright. Pity about his father. He’s a waste of time.”“I thought you liked Mark.”“I do and I don’t. He’s phony as all get out, but aside from that he’s great.”“That’s a hell of an endorsement. What’d he do to you?”Eric gestured dismissively. “Nothing. Forget it. He asked me to do a film clip for his ad campaign. Primary’s only ten days off, and there’s nothing like a cripple to pick up a few last-minute votes.”“Ooh, you’re a cynic. You sound worse than I do. Did it ever occur to you he might see you as a shining example of success and achievement, overcoming the odds and similar sentiments?”“No. It occurred to me he wants me on his team in hopes other Vietnam vets will follow suit. Prop Forty-two is his pet project. The truth is, he needs a banner issue because he’s floundering. Laddie’s not going to like it if he’s trounced at the polls.”“What difference does it make? I didn’t think he had a chance anyway.”“It’s one thing to lose and another thing to lose badly. He doesn’t want to look like a has-been right out of the gate.”“Easy come, easy go. They’ll survive, I’m sure.”“Possibly.”“Possibly? I like that. What’s that supposed to mean?”I saw his gaze shift and glanced up in time to see Dixie return. “Things aren’t always as they appear.”“The Bethels are unhappy?”“I didn’t say that.”“Incompatible?”“I didn’t say that, either.”“Then what? Come on. I won’t repeat it. You’ve got me curious.”“Mark has places to go. He can’t do that divorced. He needs Laddie’s money to make it work.”“What about her? What’s her stake in it?”“She’s more ambitious than he is. She dreams about the White House.”“You’re not serious.”“I am. She grew up in the era of Jackie 0 and Camelot. While other girls played with Barbies, she was making a list of which rooms to redo.”“I had no idea.”“Hey, Mark wants it too. Don’t get me wrong, but he’d probably be content with the Senate while she’s longing for a place in all the history books. He won’t make it this round, the competition’s too fierce, but in four years, who knows? As long as he can rally support, he’s probably got a shot at it one day. Meanwhile, if he starts looking like a loser, she might bump him and move on.”“And that’s enough to keep their marriage afloat?”“To a point. In the absence of passion, rampant ambition will suffice. Besides, divorce is a luxury.”“Oh, come on. Couples get divorced every day.”“Those are the people with nothing at stake. They can afford to set personal happiness above all else.”“As opposed to what?”“The status quo. Besides, who wants to start over at our stage in life? Are you eager to fling yourself into a new relationship?”“No.”Eric smiled. “My sentiments exactly. I mean, think of all the stories you’d have to retell, the personal revelations, the boring family history. Then you’d have to weather all the hurt feelings and the fear and the stupid misunderstandings while you get to know the other person and they get to know you. Even if you take the risk and pour yourself heart and soul into someone new, the odds are your new love’s a clone of the one you just dumped.”I said, “This is making me ill.”“It’s really no big deal. You put up with things. You look the other way, and sometimes you have no choice but to bite your tongue. If both parties are committed, whatever their reasons, it can work.”“And what if both aren’t committed?”“Then you have a problem and you have to deal with it.”
