---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_008.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["mark", "one", "mickey", "said", "could", "know", "number", "like", "see", "back", "might", "u", "name", "address", "way", "eric", "two", "well", "little", "think", "sure", "old", "day", "year", "look"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit008html

---


Unknown
SEVENI was halfway down the driveway, heading toward the road, when I saw a vehicle coming my way. It was a custom van of a sort I hadn’t seen before, sleek, black, and boxy, with Eric Hightower at the wheel. I’m not sure I would have recognized him if I hadn’t been half expecting to see him anyway. I slowed the VW to a crawl and gave a tap to the horn as I rolled down my window. He drew alongside me and pulled to a stop, rolling his window down in response. Underneath the tank top he wore, his bulging shoulders and biceps looked smooth and tanned. In the old Honky-Tonk days, his gaze was perpetually glassy and his skin had the pallor of a man who’d made a science of mixing his medications with alcohol, LSD, and grass. Then, his beard had been sparse and he’d worn his straight black hair loose across his shoulders or pulled back in a ponytail and tied with a rag.The man who studied me quizzically from the driver’s side of the van had been restored to good health. His head was now shaved, his skull as neat as a newborn’s. Gone were the beard and the bleary-eyed stare. I’d seen pictures of Eric in uniform before he left for Vietnam: young and handsome, twenty-one years old, largely untouched by life. After two tours of duty, he’d come back to the world looking gaunt and abused, ill-humored and withdrawn. He’d seemed to have a lot on his mind, but nothing he was capable of explaining to the rest of us. And none of us dared ask. One look at his face was sufficient to convince us that what he’d seen was hellish and wouldn’t bear close scrutiny. In retrospect, I suspect he imagined us judgmental and disapproving when in truth we were frightened of what we saw in his eyes. Better to look away than suffer that torment.“Can I help you?” he asked.“Hi, Eric. Kinsey Millhone. We hung around together years ago at the Tonk out in Colgate.”I watched his features clear and then brighten when he figured out who I was. “Hey. Of course. No fooling. How’re you doing?” He leaned his left arm out the window and we touched fingertips briefly, as close to a handshake as we could manage from separate vehicles. His dark eyes were clear. In his drinking days, he’d been scrawny, but the process of aging had added the requisite fifteen pounds. Success sat well on him. He seemed substantial and self-possessed.I said, “You look great. What happened to your hair?”He glanced at himself in his rearview mirror, running a hand across his smooth-shaven skull. “You like it? It feels weird. I did that a month ago and can’t quite decide.”I do. It’s better than the ponytail.”“Well, ain’t that the truth. What brings you here?”“I’m looking for my ex-husband and thought you might have a line on him.” The possibility seemed farfetched and I wondered if he’d press me on the subject, but he let it pass.“Magruder? I haven’t seen him in years.”“That’s what Dixie said. I talked to Mickey’s buddy, Shack, a little while ago and your names came up. You remember Pete Shackelford?”“Vaguely.”“He thought you might know, but I guess not, huh?”Eric said, “Sorry I can’t help. What’s the deal?”“I’m not really sure. It looks like I have a debt to settle with him and I’d like to clear it.”“I can ask around, if you want. I still see some of those guys at the gym. One of them might know.”“Thanks, but I can probably manage on my own. I’ll call his lawyer, and if that fails I’ve got some other little ways. I know how his mind works. Mickey’s devious.”Eric’s gaze held mine, and I felt an unspoken communication scuttle between us like the shadow of a cloud passing overhead. His mood seemed to shift and he let the sweep of his arm encompass the tree-strewn property surrounding us on all sides. “So what do you think? Nine point nine acres and it’s paid off, all mine. Well, half mine, given California’s community property laws.”“It’s beautiful. You’ve done well.”“Thanks. I had help.”“Dixie or AA?”“I’d have to say both.”A plumber’s truck appeared in the driveway, pulling up behind Eric’s van. He glanced back and waved to let the driver know he was aware of him and wouldn’t take all day. He turned back to me. “Why don’t you turn the car around and come back to the house? We can all have dinner together and spend time catching up.”“I’d love to, but I’d better not. Dixie’s got interviews and I have some things to take care of myself. Maybe another time. I’ll give you a call and we can set something up.” I put my car in gear.“Great. Do that. You promise.“Scout’s honor.”The driver of the truck behind him gave an impatient beep on his horn. Eric glanced back at him and waved again. “Anyway, nice to see you. Behave yourself.”“You too.”He rolled his window up, and I could see him accelerate with the help of a device on his steering wheel. It was the only reminder I’d had that he was a double amputee. He tapped his horn as he departed and I continued down the driveway, the two of us moving in opposite directions.I headed into town, pondering the nature of the divine comedy. Two of my pet beliefs had been reversed in the past few hours. Given the brevity of my marriage to Mickey, I’d always assumed he’d been faithful. That notion turned out to be false so it was stricken from the record, along with any lingering confidence I felt. I’d also suspected, well, let’s be honest about this, I’d been convinced Mickey’d played a part in Benny Quintero’s death. It turned out he hadn’t, so we could strike that one, too. Guilty of infidelity, innocent of manslaughter. Someone with talent could convert that to lyrics for a country-western tune. In some ways Dixie’d nailed it. Did I really want to know about this shit? I guess I didn’t have a choice. The question was what to do with it?The minute I hit the office, I hauled out the telephone book and leafed through the yellow pages to the section listing attorneys. I ran a finger down the column until I found Mark Bethel’s name in a little box of its own. The ad read CRIMINAL DEFENSE and, under that heading, specified the following: Drugs, Molest, Weapons, White Collar, DUI, Theft/Fraud, Assault, Spousal Abuse, and Sex Crimes, which I thought just about covered it-except for murder, of course. Mark Bethel had been Mickey’s attorney when he resigned from the department, a move Mickey’d made on Mark’s advice. I’d never been crazy about Mark, and after Mickey’s unceremonious departure there was little reason for our paths to cross. On the odd occasion when I ran into him around town, we tended to be cordial, feigning a warmth neither of us felt. We were bound by old business, one of those uneasy alliances that survived more on form than content. Despite my lukewarm attitude, I had to admit he was an excellent attorney, though in the past few years he’d set his practice aside in his bid for public office, one Republican among many hoping for a shot at Alan Cranston’s Senate seat in the coming November elections. In the past ten years, his political ambitions had begun to emerge. He’d allied himself with the local party machine, ingratiating himself with Republicans by working tirelessly on Deukmejian’s 1988 gubernatorial campaign. He’d opened his Montebello home for countless glitzy fundraisers. He’d run for and won a place on the county board of supervisors; then he’d run for state assembly. Logically, his next step should have been a try for Congress, but he’d skipped that and entered the primary for a U.S. Senate seat. He must have felt his political profile was sufficient to net him the kind of votes he’d need to outstrip Ed Zschau. Fat chance, in my opinion, but then what did I know? I hate politicians; they he more flagrantly than I do and with a lot less imagination. It helped that Bethel was married to a woman who had a fortune of her own.I’d heard through the grapevine Laddie Bethel was bankrolling the major portion of his campaign. She’d made a name for herself locally as a fund-raiser of some persuasion for numerous charitable organizations. Whatever worthy cause she adopted, she certainly wasn’t shy about sending me donation requests with a return envelope enclosed. Inevitably, there was a series of amounts to be circled: $, 500, $1,000, $500, $50. If the charitable event was an evening affair, “black tie optional” (in case your green one was at the cleaners). I’d also be offered the opportunity to buy a “table” for my cronies at a thousand dollars a plate. Little did she know I was, by nature, so cheap that I’d sit there and pick the stamp off the prestamped envelope. In the meantime, Mark maintained an office and a secretary with his old law firm.I dialed Mark Bethel’s office, and his secretary answered, followed by an immediate “May I put you on hold?”By the time I said sure, she was already gone. I was treated to a jazz rendition of “Scarborough Fair.”Mark’s secretary clicked back on the line. “Thanks for holding. This is Judy. May I help you?”“Yes, hi, Judy. This is Kinsey Millhone. I’m an old friend of Mark’s. I think I met you at the Bethels’ Christmas party a couple of years back. Is he there by any chance?”“Oh, hi, Kinsey. I remember you,” she said. “No, he’s off at a committee meeting, probably gone for the day. You want him to call in the morning, or is there something I can do?”“Maybe,” I said. “I’m trying to get in touch with my ex-husband. Mickey Magruder was a client of his.”“Oh, I know Mickey,” she said, and right away I wondered if she knew him in the biblical sense.“Do you know if Mark has a current address and phone number?”“Hold on and I’ll check. I know we have something, because he called here a couple months ago and I spoke to him myself.” I could hear pages rattling as she leafed through her book.“Ah, here we go.” She recited an address on Sepulveda, but the house number differed from the one I had. The digits were the same but the order was changed, which was typical of Mickey. In his semi-paranoid state, he’d give the correct information but with the numbers transposed so you couldn’t pin him down. He thought your address was your own damn business and phones were meant for your convenience, not anyone else’s. If other people couldn’t call him, what did he care? I don’t know how he managed to receive his mail or have pizza delivered. Those were not issues he found interesting when his privacy was at stake. Judy chimed back in, and the phone number she recited was a match for the one I had in my book.I said, “You can scratch that one out. I tried it a while ago, and it’s a disconnect. I thought maybe Mickey moved or had the number changed.”I could hear her hesitate. “I probably shouldn’t say this. Mark hates when I discuss a client, so please don’t tell him I said this “Of course not.”“When Mickey called, this would have been mid-March, he did ask to borrow money. I mean, he didn’t ask me. This is just what I heard later, after Mark talked to him. Mark said Mickey’d had to sell his car because he couldn’t afford the upkeep and insurance, let alone the gas. He’s got financial problems even Mark couldn’t bail him out of.”“That doesn’t sound good. Did Mark lend him any money?”“I’m not really sure. He might have. Mickey was always one of Mark’s favorites.”“Could you check your message carbons and see if Mickey left a number where Mark could reach him?”“I’ll check if you like, but I remember asking at the time, and he said Mark would know.”“So Mark might have another number?”“It’s possible, I guess. I can ask and have him call you.”“I’d appreciate that. He can buzz me tomorrow and we’ll take it from there.” I left her my number and we clicked off.My evening was unremarkable, dinner with Henry at Rosie’s Tavern half a block away, after which I curled up with a book and read until I fell asleep, probably ten whole minutes later.I turned off the alarm moments before it was set to ring. I brushed my teeth, pulled on my sweats, and went out for a three-mile jog. The bike path along the beach was cloaked in the usual spring fog, the sky a uniform gray, the ocean blended at the horizon as though a scrim of translucent plastic had been stretched taut between the two. The air temperature was perfect, faintly chill, faintly damp. I was feeling light and strong, and I ran with a rare sense of happiness.Home again, I showered, dressed, and ate breakfast, then hopped in my car and hit the road for San Felipe with the receipt from the storage company tucked in my pocket. I’d dressed up to some extent, which in my case doesn’t amount to much. I only own one dress: black, collarless, with long sleeves and a tucked bodice (which is a fancy word for front). This entirely synthetic garment, guaranteed wrinkle-free (but probably flammable), is as versatile as anything I’ve owned. In it, I can accept invitations to all but the snootiest of cocktail parties, pose as a mourner at any funeral, make court appearances, conduct surveillance, hustle clients, interview hostile witnesses, traffic with known felons, or pass myself off as a gainfully employed person instead of a freelance busybody accustomed to blue jeans, turtlenecks, and tennis shoes.Before I departed, I’d taken a few minutes to complete a generic claim form that I’d dummied up from my days of working at California Fidelity Insurance. As I headed south on 101, I practiced the prissy, bureaucratic attitude I affect when I’m masquerading as someone else. Being a private investigator is made up of equal parts ingenuity, determination, and persistence, with a sizable dose of acting skills thrown in.The drive to San Felipe took forty-five minutes. The scenery en route consisted largely of citrus and avocado groves, stretches of farmland, and occasional roadside markets selling, what else.?, oranges, lemons, and avocados. I spotted the storage company from half a mile away. It was just off the main road, countless rows of two-story buildings, occupying two square blocks. The architectural style suggested a newly constructed California prison, complete with floodlights and tall chain-link fences.I turned in at the gate. The buildings were identical: cinder block and blank doors, with wide freight elevators and a loading ramp at each end. The units were marked alphabetically and numerically in a system I couldn’t quite decipher. The doors in each section appeared to be color-coded, but maybe that was simply an architectural flourish. It couldn’t be much fun designing a facility that looked like cracker boxes arranged end to end. I passed a number of broad alleyways. Arrows directed me to the main office, where I parked and got out.I pushed through the glass door to a serviceable space, maybe twenty feet by twenty with a counter running across the center. The area on the far side of the counter was taken up by rental-quality file cabinets and a plain wooden desk. This was not a multi-layered company with the administration assuming any lofty position. The sole individual on duty apparently functioned as receptionist, secretary, and plant manager, sitting at a typewriter with a pencil in his mouth while he hunt-and-pecked his way through a memorandum of some sort. I guessed he was in his late seventies, round-faced and balding, with a pair of reading glasses worn low on his nose. I could see his belly bulging out like an infant monkey clinging closely to its mother’s chest. “Be with you in just a second,” he said, typing on.“Take your time.“How do you spell ‘mischeevious’?“M-i-s-c-h-i-e-v-o-u-s.”“You sure? Doesn’t look right.”“Pretty sure,” I said.When he’d finished, he stood up, separated the carbons, and tucked both the original and the copies in matching blue folders. He came over to the counter, hitching up his pants. “Didn’t mean to keep you waiting, but I was on a tear,” he said. “When business is slow, I write stories for my great-grandson. Kid’s barely two and reads like a champ. Loves his pappaw’s little booklets written just for him. This one’s about a worm name of Wiggles and his escapades. Lot of fun for me, and you should see Dickie’s little face light up. I figure one day I’ll get ’em published and have ’em done up proper. I have a lady friend offered to do the illustrations, but somebody told me that’s a bad idea. I guess these New York types like to hire their own artists.“News to me,” I said.His cheeks tinted faintly and his tone of voice became shy. “I don’t suppose you know an agent might take a look at this.”“I don’t, but if I hear of one, I’ll let you know.”“That’d be good. Meantime, what can I do for you?”I showed him my California Fidelity Insurance identification, which bore an old photograph of me and the company seal of approval.His gaze shifted from the photo to my face. “You oughta get you a new photo. This doesn’t do you justice. You’re a lot better looking.”“You really think so? Thanks. By the way, I’m Kinsey Millhone. And you’re,?”“George Wedding.”“Nice to meet you.”“I hope you’re not selling policies. I’d hate to disappoint, but I’m insured to the hilt.”“I’m not selling anything, but I could use some help.” I hesitated. I had a story all ready. I intended to show him a homeowner’s claim listing several items lost to flooding when some water pipes broke. Of course, this was all completely false, but I was hoping he’d react with sufficient moral indignation to set the record straight. What I wanted was the address and phone number Mickey’d used when he’d rented the space. I could then compare the information to facts already in my possession and thus (perhaps) figure out where the hell Mickey was. In my mind, on the way down, I’d spun the story out to a convincing degree, but now that I was here I couldn’t bring myself to tell it. This is the truth about lying: You’re putting one over on some poor gullible dunce, which makes him appear stupid for not spotting the deception. Lying contains the same hostile elements as a practical joke in that the “victim” ends up looking foolish in his own eyes and laughable in everyone else’s. I’m willing to lie to pompous bureaucrats, when thwarted by knaves, or when all else falls, but I was having trouble lying to a man who wrote worm adventure stories for his great-grandson. George was patiently waiting for me to go on. I folded the bogus claim in half until the bottom of the page rested a couple of inches from the top and the only lines showing were those containing the name, address, and telephone number of ‘John Russell.’ “You want to know the truth?”“That’d be nice,” he said blandly.“Ah. Well, the truth is I was fired by CFI about three years ago. I’m actually a private investigator, looking for a man I was once married to.” I pointed to John Russell’s name. “That’s not his real name, but I suspect the address may be roughly correct. My ex scrambles numbers as a way of protecting himself.”“Is this police business? Because my records are confidential, unless you have a court order. If you think this fellow was using his storage unit for illegal purposes, manufacturing drugs, for instance might talk me into it. Otherwise, no deal.”I could almost have sworn George was inviting me to fib, given that he’d laid out the conditions under which he might be persuaded to open his files to me. However, having started with the truth, I thought I might as well stick to my guns. “You’re making this tough. I wish I could tell you otherwise, but this isn’t related to any criminal activity, at least, as far as I know. Uhm, wow, this is hard. I’m not used to this,” I said. “He and I parted enemies and it’s ‘just come to my attention I misjudged him badly. I can’t live with my conscience until I square things with him. I know it sounds corny, but it’s true.”“What’d you do?” George asked.“It’s not what I did. It’s what I didn’t do,” I said. “He was implicated in a murder, well, not a murder, really, manslaughter is more like it. The point is I didn’t wait to hear his side of it. I just assumed he was guilty and walked out on him. I feel bad about that. I promised ‘for better or for worse’ and gave him ‘worse.’”“So now what?”“So now I’m trying to track him down so I can apologize. Maybe I can make amends, if it’s not too late.”George’s face was a study in caution. “I’m not entirely clear what you want from me.”I passed him the form, tilting my head to read the header along with him. I pointed to the relevant lines. “I think this is partly right. I’ve got two versions of this address. If yours matches this one or if you have another variation yet, I can probably determine which is correct.”He studied the name and address. “I remember this fellow. Went delinquent on his payments. We emptied his unit and auctioned everything off.”“That’s what worries me. I think he’s in trouble. Do you think you can help?”I could see him vacillate. I left the clipboard up on the counter, angled in his direction. I could see his gaze retracing the lines of print. He moved to a file cabinet, scanned the labels on the drawer fronts, and opened the third one down. He pulled out a fat binder and laid it across the open drawer. He wet his thumb and began to leaf through. He found the relevant page, popped open the rings, removed a sheet of paper, and copied it, handing me the information without another word.
