---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_009.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["claas", "said", "aldo", "detective", "mickey", "could", "two", "one", "u", "seemed", "tell", "like", "talk", "time", "hand", "took", "gun", "call", "left", "back", "felt", "would", "looking", "even", "made"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit009html

---


Unknown
EIGHTI returned to the office, where I spent the rest of the day paying bills, returning phone calls, and taking care of correspondence. There was no message from Mark Bethel. I’d try him again if I didn’t hear from him soon. I locked my office at four-thirty, shoving my Los Angeles street map in the outer pouch of my bag. I left my car for the time being and walked over to the public library, where I checked the criss-cross for the area encompassed by the three differing Sepulveda street numbers Mickey’d listed as impossible to determine the his home address. It was best candidate from looking at a map. I was going to have to make a run down there. It was time to satisfy myself as to his current situation, maybe even time for the two of us to talk. I had a big whack of money in my savings account. I was willing to offer my help if Mickey wasn’t too proud to accept. I walked back to the office, where I picked up my car and made the short drive home. I didn’t even have the details and I was already sick about the part I’d played in his slide from grace.I arrived at my apartment to find two gentlemen standing on my doorstep. I knew in a flash they were plainclothes detectives: neatly dressed, clean-shaven, their expressions bland and attentive, the perfect law enforcement presence on this May afternoon. I felt a spritz of electricity coursing through my frame. My hands were left tingling and the skin on my back suddenly felt luminous, like a neon sign flashing GUILT, GUILT, GUILT. My first thought was Teddy Rich had reported an intruder, that an officer had been dispatched, that he’d called for a tech who’d subsequently dusted for prints. Mine would have shown up on the inner and outer aspects of the pet door, on the edge of the desk, on the back doorknob, in other places so numerous I could hardly recall. I’d been a cop for two years and a P. I. since then. (I’d also been arrested once, but I don’t want to talk about that now, thanks.) The point is, my prints were in the system, and the computer was going to put me inside Teddy Rich’s house. The cops would ask what I was doing there and what could I say? Was there an innocent explanation? I couldn’t think of one to save me. The dog, of course, would pick me out of a police lineup, tugging at my pant leg, joyously barking, jumping, and slobbering on my shoes as they cuffed me and took me away. I could try to plea-bargain right up front or wait until sentencing and throw myself on the mercy of the court.I hesitated on the walkway, my house keys in hand. Surely, the cops had more pressing cases to pursue these days. Why would they even bother with a crime scene tech? The notion was absurd. These fellows might not be cops at all. Maybe Teddy figured out what I’d done and had sent these two goons to crush my elbows, my knees, and other relevant joints. Somewhat chirpily, I said, “Hi. Are you looking for me?”The two of them seemed to be approximately the same age: late thirties, trim, fit, one dark, the other fair. The blond carried a briefcase in his left hand like he was doing door-to-door sales. He spoke first. “Miss Millhone?” He wore a red plaid shirt under a tweed sport coat, his Adam’s apple compressed by the knot in his solid red tie. His slacks were dark cotton, wrinkled across the crotch from sitting in the car too long.“That’s right.”He held out his right hand. “My name’s Felix Claas. This is my partner, John Aldo. We’re detectives with the Los Angeles Police Department. Could we talk to you?”Aldo held out two business cards and a wallet he flipped open to expose his badge. Detective Aldo was a big guy with a muscular body, probably six-three, 240 pounds. He wore his dark hair slightly shaggy, and his dark eyes receded under wide dark eyebrows that came together at the bridge of his nose. His slacks were polyester, and he had a sport coat neatly folded and laid across one arm. His short-sleeved cotton shirt exposed a matting of silky hair on his forearms. He looked like a man who preferred wearing sweats. I’d heard his first name as “John,” but I noticed on his business card the spelling was the Italian, Gian, and I made the mental correction. In the flush of apprehension, I’d already forgotten the first detective’s name. I glanced down at the cards again. Felix Claas was the blond, Gian Aldo, the darker one.Claas spoke up again, smiling pleasantly. His blond hair looked wet, parted on the side and combed straight back behind his ears. His eyebrows and lashes were an almost invisible pale gold, so that his blue eyes seemed stark. His lips were full and unusually pink. He had a cleft in his chin. “Great town you have here. The minute we crossed the county line, I could feel my blood pressure drop about fifteen points.”“Thanks. We’re lucky. It’s like this all year long. We get a marine layer sometimes in the summer months, but it burns off by noon so it’s hard to complain.” Maybe this pertained to an old case of mine.Detective Aldo eased into the conversation. “We had a chat with Lieutenant Robb. I hope we haven’t caught you at a bad time.”“Not at all. This is fine. You’re friends of his?”“Well, no, ma’am, we aren’t. We’ve talked to him by phone, but we only met today. Seems like a nice guy.“He’s great. I’ve known Jonah for years,” I said. “What’s this about?”“A case we’ve been working on. We’d like to talk to you inside, if you don’t object.”Detective Claas chimed in, “This shouldn’t take long. Fifteen-twenty minutes. We’ll be as quick as we can.”“Sure. Come on in.” I turned and unlocked the front door, talking over my shoulder. “When’d you get up here?”“About an hour ago. We tried calling your office, but they told us you’d left. We must have just missed you.”“I had some errands to run,” I said, wondering why I felt I owed them an explanation. I stepped across the threshold and they followed me in. In the past few years, a number of investigations had taken me to Los Angeles. One of the cases I’d handled for California Fidelity had exposed me to a bunch of badasses. This was probably related. The criminal element form a special subset, the same names surfacing over and over again. It’s always interesting to find out what the cruds are up to.I took a mental photograph of my apartment, idly aware of how it must appear to strangers. Small, immaculate, as compact as a ship’s interior complete with cubbyholes and built-ins. Kitchenette to the right; desk and seating arrangement to the left. Royal-blue shag carpet, a small spiral staircase leading to a loft above. I set my shoulder bag on one of the stools at the kitchen counter and moved the six steps into the living room.The two detectives waited in the doorway deferentially.“Have a seat,” I said.Aldo said, “Thanks. Nice place. You live alone?”“As a matter of fact, I do.”“Lucky you. My girlfriend’s a slob. There’s no way I can keep my place looking this clean.”Claas sat down on the small sofa tucked into the bay window, setting his briefcase on the floor beside him. While Claas and Aldo seemed equally chatty, Claas was more reserved, nearly prim in his verbal manner, while Aldo seemed relaxed. Detective Aldo took one of the two matching director’s chairs, which left me with the other. I sat down, feeling subtly maneuvered, though I wasn’t sure why. Aldo slouched in the chair with his legs spread, his hands hanging between his knees. The canvas on the director’s chair sagged and creaked beneath his shifting weight. His thighs were enormous, and his posture seemed both indolent and intimidating. Claas flicked him a look and he altered his posture, sitting up straight.Claas turned his attention back to me. “We understand you were married to a former vice detective named Magruder.”I was completely taken aback. “Mickey? That’s right. Is this about him?” I felt a tingle of fear. Connections tumbled together in a pattern I couldn’t quite discern. Whatever was going on, it had to be associated with his current financial straits. Maybe he’d robbed a bank, scammed someone, or pulled a disappearing act. Maybe there was a warrant outstanding, and these guys had been assigned the job of tracking him down. I covered my discomfort with a laugh. “What’s he up to?”Claas’s expression remained remote. “Unfortunately, Mr. Magruder was the victim of a shooting. He survived, he’s alive, but he’s not doing well. Yesterday we finally got a line on him. At the time of the assault, he didn’t have identification in his possession, so he was listed as a John Doe until we ran his prints.”“He was shot?” I could feel myself move the needle back to the beginning of the cut. Had I heard him correctly?“Yes, ma’am.”“He’s all right, though, isn’t he?”Claas’s tone ranged somewhere between neutrality and regret. “Tell you the truth, it’s not looking so good. Doctors say he’s stable, but he’s on life support. He’s never regained consciousness, and the longer this goes on, the less likely he is to make a full recovery.”Or any at all was what I heard. I could feel myself blink. Mickey dying or dead? The detective was still talking, but I felt I was suffering a temporary hearing loss. I held a hand up. “Hang on. I’m sorry, but I can’t seem to comprehend.”“There’s no hurry. Take your time,” Aldo said.I took a couple of deep breaths. “This is weird. Where is he?”“UCLA. He’s currently in ICU, but he may be transferred to County, depending on his condition.”“He always had good insurance coverage, if it’s a question of funds.” The notion of Mickey at County didn’t sit well with me. I was taking deep breaths, risking hyperventilation in my attempt to compose myself. “Can I see him?”There was a momentary pause, and then Claas said, “Not just yet, but we can probably work something out.” He seemed singularly unenthusiastic, and I didn’t press the point.Aldo watched me with concern. “Are you okay?”“I’m fine. I’m just surprised,” I said. “I don’t know what I thought you were doing here, but it wasn’t this. I can’t believe anything bad could ever happen to him. He was always a brawler, but he seemed invincible, at least to me. What happened?”“That’s what we’re trying to piece together,” Claas said. “He’d been shot twice, once in the head and once in the chest. A patrolman spotted him lying on the sidewalk little after three A.m. The weapon, a semi-automatic, was found in the gutter about ten feet away. This was a commercial district, a lot of bars in the area, so it’s possible Mr. Magruder got into a dispute. We have a couple of guys out now canvassing the neighborhood. So far no witnesses. For now, we’re working backward, trying to get a line on his activities prior to the shooting.”“When was this?”“Early morning hours of May fourteenth. Wednesday of last week.”Claas said, “Do you mind if we ask you a couple of questions?”“Not at all. Please do.”I expected one of them to take out a notebook, but none emerged. I glanced at the briefcase and wondered if I was being recorded. Meanwhile, Claas was talking on. “We’re in the process of eliminating some possibilities. This is mostly filling in the blanks, if you can help us out.”“Sure, I’ll try. I’m not sure how, but fire away,” I said. Inwardly, I flinched at my choice of words.Claas cleared his throat. His voice was lighter, reedier. “When you last spoke to your ex-husband, did he mention any problems? Threats, disputes, anything like that?”I leaned forward, relieved. “I haven’t spoken to Mickey in fourteen years.”Something flickered between them, one of those wordless conversations married couples learn to conduct with their eyes. Detective Aldo took over. “You’re the owner of a nine-millimeter Smith and Wesson?”“I was at one time.” I was on the verge of saying more but decided to rein myself in until I figured out where they were going. The empty box that had originally housed the gun was still sitting in the carton beside my desk, less than six feet away.Claas said, “Can you tell us when you purchased it?”“I didn’t. Mickey bought that gun and gave it to me as a wedding gift. That was August of 1971.”“Strange wedding present,” Aldo remarked.“He’s a strange guy,” I said.“Where’s the gun at this time?”“Beats me. I haven’t laid eyes on it for years. I assumed Mickey took it with him when he moved to L. A.”“So you haven’t seen the gun since approximately...”I looked from Claas to Aldo as the obvious implications began to sink in. I’d been slow on the uptake. “Wait a minute. That was the gun used?”“Let’s put it this way: Yours was the gun that was found at the scene. We’re still waiting for ballistics.”“You can’t think I had anything to do with it.”“Your name popped up in the computer as the registered owner. We’re looking for a starting point, and this made sense. If Mr. Magruder carried the gun, it’s possible someone took it away from him and shot him with it.”“That puts me in the clear,” I said facetiously. I felt like biting my tongue. Sarcasm is the wrong tack to take with cops. Better to play humble and cooperative.A silence settled between the two. They’d seemed friendly and confiding, but I knew from experience there’d be a sizable gap between the version they’d given me and the one they’d withheld. Aldo took a stick of gum from his coat pocket and tore it in half. He tucked half in his pocket and slipped the paper wrapper and the foil from the other half. He slid the chewing gum into his mouth. He seemed disinterested for the moment, but I knew they’d spend the return trip comparing notes, matching their reactions and intuitions against the information I’d given them.Claas shifted on the couch. “Can you tell us when you last spoke to Mr. Magruder?”“It’s Mickey. Please use his first name. This is hard enough as it is. He left Santa Teresa in 1977. I don’t remember talking to him after we divorced.”“Can you tell us what contact you’ve had since then?”“You just asked that. I’ve had none.”Claas’s gaze fixed on mine, rather pointedly, I thought. “You haven’t spoken to him in the past few months,” he said, not a question, but a statement infused with skepticism.“No. Absolutely not. I haven’t talked to him.”While Detective Claas tried to hold my attention, I could see that Aldo was making a discreet visual tour of the living room. His gaze moved from item to item, methodically assessing everything within range. Desk, files, box, answering machine, bookshelves. I could almost hear him thinking to himself: Which of these objects doesn’t belong? I saw his focus shift back to the cardboard box, So far, I hadn’t said a word about the delinquent payments on Mickey’s storage bin. On the face of it, I couldn’t see how withholding the information represented any criminal behavior on my part. What justice was I obstructing? Who was I aiding and abetting? I didn’t shoot my ex. I wasn’t in custody and wasn’t under oath. If it seemed advisable, I could always contact the detectives later when I “remembered” something relevant. All this went through my mind in the split second while I was busy covering my butt. If the two picked up on my uneasiness, neither said a word. Not that I expected them to gasp and exchange significant looks.Detective Claas cleared his throat again. “What about him? Has he been in touch with you?”I confess a little irritability was creeping into my response. “That’s the same thing, isn’t it, whether I talk to him or he talks to me? We divorced years ago. We don’t have any reason to stay in touch. If he called, I’d hang up. I don’t want to talk to him.”Aldo’s tone was light, nearly bantering. What are you so mad about? The poor guy’s down for the count.”I felt myself flush. “Sorry. That’s just how it is. We’re not one of those couples that turned all lovey-dovey once the papers were signed. I have nothing against him, but I’ve never been interested in being his best friend, nor he mine, I might add.”“Same with my ex,” he said. “Still, sometimes there’s a piece of business, you know, a stock certificate or news of an old pal. You might forward the mail, even if you hate their guts. It’s not unusual for one ex to drop the other a note if something relevant comes up.”“Mickey doesn’t write notes.”Claas shifted in his seat. “What’s he do then, call?”I could feel myself grow still. Why was he so determined to pursue the point? “Look. For the fourth or fifth time now, Mickey and I don’t talk. Honest. Cross my heart. Scout’s honor and all that. We’re not enemies. We’re not antagonistic. We just don’t have that kind of relationship.”“Really. How would you characterize it? Friendly? Distant? Cordial?”“What is this?” I said. “What’s the relevance? I mean, come on, guys. You can’t be serious. Why would I shoot my ex-husband with my own gun and leave it at the scene? I’d have to be nuts.”Aldo smiled to himself. “People get rattled. You never know what they’ll do. We’re just looking for information. Anything you can give us, we’d appreciate.”“Tell, me your theory,” I said.“We don’t have a theory,” Claas said. “We’re hoping to eliminate some angles. You could save us a lot of time if you’d cooperate.”“I’m doing that. This is what cooperation looks like, in case you’re not accustomed to it. You’re barking up the wrong tree. I don’t even know where Mickey lives these days.”The two detectives stared at me.“I’m telling you the truth.”Detective Claas asked the next question without reference to his notes. “Can you tell us where you were on March twenty-seventh?”My mind went blank. “I haven’t the faintest idea. Where were you?” I said. I could tell my hands were going to start shaking. My fingers were cold, and without even thinking about it, I crossed my arms and tucked my hands against my sides. I knew I looked stubborn and defensive, but I was suddenly unnerved.“Do you have an appointment book you might check?”“You know what? I think we should stop this conversation right now. If you’re here because you think I was somehow involved in a shooting, you’ll have to talk to my attorney because I’m done with this bullshit.”Detective Aldo seemed surprised. “Hey, come on. There’s no call for that. We’re not accusing you of anything. This is an exchange of information.”“What was exchanged? I tell you things, but what do you tell me? Or did I miss that part?”Aldo smiled, undismayed by my prickliness. “We told you he was injured and you told us you never talked to him. See? We tell you and then you tell us. It’s like a dialogue. We’re trading.”“Why did you ask where I was March twenty seventh? What’s that about?”Claas spoke up. “We checked his telephone bills. There was a call to this number that lasted thirty minutes. We assumed the two of you talked. Unless someone else lives here, which you’ve denied.”“Show me,” I said. I held out my hand.He leaned down and reached into the partially opened briefcase, sliding out a sheaf of phone bills, which he passed to me without comment. On top of the stack was Mickey’s bill for April, itemizing his March service. I glanced at the header, noting that the phone number on the account was the same one I had. At that point, his February bill was already in arrears. The past-due notice warned that if his payment wasn’t received within ten days, his service would be terminated. I let my eye drift down the column of toll calls and long-distance charges for March. Only two calls had been made, both to Santa Teresa. The first was March 13, made to Mark Bethel’s office. I’d heard about that from Judy. The second was to my number. Sure enough, that call was made on March 7 at 1:7 P.M. and lasted, as specified, for a full thirty minutes.
