---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_015.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["one", "tim", "said", "back", "hand", "eye", "mickey", "like", "door", "could", "time", "know", "bar", "two", "would", "looked", "year", "cigarette", "see", "room", "left", "lit", "around", "day", "guy"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit015html

---


Unknown
FOURTEENThe main drag in Colgate is four lanes wide, lined with an assortment of businesses ranging from carpet stores to barbershops, with a gas station on every other corner and an automobile dealership on the blocks between. Colgate, sprawling, eclectic, and unpretentious, provides housing for those who work in Santa Teresa but can’t afford to live there. The population count of the two communities is roughly the same, but their dispositions are different, like siblings whose personalities reflect their relative positions in the family matrix. Santa Teresa is the older of the two, stylish and staid. Colgate is the more playful, less insistent on conformity, more likely to tolerate differences among its residents. Few of its shops stay open after 6 P.M. Bars, pool halls, drive-in theaters, and bowling alleys form the exception.The parking lot at the Honky-Tonk looked much as it had fourteen years before. Cars had changed. Whereas in the seventies the patrons were driving Mustangs and VW vans painted in psychedelic shades, streetlights now gleamed on Porsches, BMWs, and Trans-Ams. Crossing the lot, I experienced the same curious excitement I’d felt when I was single and hunting. Given my current state of enlightenment, I wouldn’t dream of circulating through the bar scene, barhopping, we called it, but I did in those days. In the sixties and seventies, that’s what you did for recreation. That’s how you met guys. That’s how you got laid. What Women’s Liberation “liberated” was our attitude toward sex. Where we once used sex for barter, now we gave it away. I marvel at the prostitutes we must have put out of business, doling out sexual “favors” in the name of personal freedom. What were we thinking? All we ended up with were bar bums afflicted with pubic vermin.The Honky-Tonk had expanded, incorporating space formerly occupied by the adjacent furniture store that used to advertise liquidation sales every six to eight months. There was a line at the door, where one of the bouncers was checking Ids by running them through a scanner. Each patron, once cleared, was stamped HT on the back of the right hand, the HT of the Honky-Tonk apparently serving as clearance to drink. That way the waiters and bartenders didn’t have to card each cherubic patron ordering rum and Coke the drinker’s equivalent of the training bra.Now sporting my ink brand, I walked through a fog of cigarette smoke, trying to get a feel for the age and financial status of the crowd inside. There was a large infusion of college students, fresh-faced, uninhibited, their naiveté and bad judgment not yet having come home to roost. The rest were chronic singles, the same aging bachelors and divorcees who’d been eyeballing each other since I’d first buzzed through.There was still sawdust on the floor. Between the dark-painted wainscoting and the pressed-tin ceiling, the walls were hung with old black-and-white photographs showing Colgate as it had been sixty years before: bucolic, unspoiled, rolling hills stretching out as far as the eye could see. The images were illuminated by gaudy beer signs, red and green neon tinting the vanished grasslands and sunsets.There were also countless photographs of local celebrities and regulars, pictures taken on St. Patrick’s Day, New Year’s Eve, and other occasions when the Tonk closed its doors to the public and hosted private parties. I spotted two 8-by-11 photos of Mickey, Pete Shackelford, and Roy Littenberg. The first showed them in police uniform, standing at parade rest: solemn-faced, stiff-backed, serious about law and order. In the second, they were seasoned, men who’d become cynics, guys with old eyes who now smiled over cigarettes and highballs, arms flung casually across one another’s shoulders. Roy Littenberg was the oldest by a good ten years. Of the three, he was now dead and Mickey was barely clinging to life. I wondered if there was a way to conjure them up out of memories and smoke-three cops, like ghosts, visible as long as I didn’t turn and try to look at them directly.Two long narrow rooms ran side by side, lined with wooden booths. Each had its own sound system, waves of music pounding against the senses as I moved from room to room. The first held the bar and the second a dance floor, surrounded by tables. The third room, since added, was sufficient to accommodate six pool tables, all of them occupied. The guys played Foosball and darts. The “girls” trooped in and out of the ladies’ room, touching up the eye makeup, hiking up their pantyhose. I followed them in, taking advantage of an empty stall to avail myself of the facilities. I could hear two women in the adjoining stall, one barfing up her dinner while the other offered encouraging comments. “That’s fine. Don’t force it. You’re doing great. It’ll come.” If I’d even heard of it in my day, I’d have assumed Bulimia was the capital of some newly formed Baltic state.When I left the stall, there were four women in line and another three in front of the mirrors. I waited for an empty place at a sink, washing my hands while I checked my reflection. The fluorescent lighting gave my otherwise unblemished skin a sickly appearance, emphasizing the bags under my eyes. My hair looked like thatch. I wore no lipstick, but that was probably just as well, as the addition would have played up the yellow cast in my aging complexion. I was wearing Mickey’s black leather jacket as a talisman, the same old blue jeans, and a black turtleneck, though I’d traded my usual tennis shoes for my usual boots. Mostly, I was dawdling, avoiding the moment when I’d have to perch on a bar stool and buy myself a drink. The two young women emerged from their stall, both of them thin as snakes. The barfer pulled out a prepasted toothbrush and began to scrub. In five years the stomach acid would eat through her tooth enamel, if she didn’t drop dead first.I emerged from the ladies’ room, passing the dance floor on my left. I ventured over to the bar, where I bought myself a draft beer. In the absence of available bar stools, I drank the beer standing by myself, trying to look like I was keeping an appointment. Now and then I’d glance at my watch, like I was somewhat annoyed because I didn’t have all night. I’m sure many people nearby were completely fooled by this. A few guys assessed me from a distance, not because I was “hot” but because I represented fresh meat, waiting to be graded and stamped.I deleted my ego from the situation and tried to scrutinize the place from Mickey’s point of view. What had possessed him to lend Tim Littenberg the money? Mickey wasn’t one to take risks like that. He kept his assets liquid even if he earned very little in the way of interest. He was probably happiest making deposits to the Curtain Rod Savings and Loan. Tim Littenbergor, or his dad, must have made a hell of a pitch. Nostalgia might have played a part. Lit and his wife were never good with money. They’d lived from paycheck to paycheck, overdrawn, in debt, their credit cards maxed out. If Tim had needed a stake, they probably didn’t have the cash to lend. Whatever the motivation, Mickey’d apparently made the deal. The note had been signed and payment had come due. I’d seen no evidence the loan had been repaid. Curious. Mickey certainly needed the money, and the Honky-Tonk was clearly doing good business.Near the wall, a bar stool became vacant and I eased into the spot. My eyes strayed back to the mounted photographs and I studied the one hanging next to me. The Three Musketeers again. In this one, Mickey, Shack, and Lit were sitting at the bar, glasses aloft, offering a toast to someone off to their left. Dixie was visible in the background, her eyes fastened on Mickey, a look both hungry and possessive. Why hadn’t I seen that at the time? What kind of dunce was I? I squinted at the picture, taking in the faces, one by one. Lit had always been the best-looking of the three. He was tall, narrow through the shoulders, long arms and legs, beautiful long fingers. I’m a sucker for good teeth and his were even and white, except for one cuspid that sat slightly askew, giving his smile a boyish appeal. His chin was pronounced, his bony jaw wide at the apex. His Adam’s apple danced when he spoke. The last time I’d seen him was maybe four years ago and then just in passing. His hair was thinning by then. He’d been in his early sixties, and from what Shack had said he was already in the midst of a struggle for his life.I rotated slightly on the bar stool and scanned the area, hoping to see Tim. I’d never met Lit’s son. Back when I was married to Mickey and hanging out with his parents, he was already grown and gone. He’d joined the army in 1970, and for the period in question he was off in Vietnam. In those days, a lot of STPD cops were ex-army, very gung-ho about the military, supportive of our presence in Southeast Asia. The public by then had lost patience with the war, but not in that circle. I’d seen pictures of Tim that his parents passed around. He always looked grubby and content, a cigarette between his lips, his helmet pushed back, his rifle resting against his knees. Lit would read portions of his letters in which he described his exploits. To me, he sounded reckless and defiant, a bit too enthusiastic, a twenty-year-old kid who spent his days stoned, who loved to kill “gooks” and brag about it later to his friends back home. He’d been brought up on charges after a particularly nasty incident involving two dead Vietnamese babies. Lit stopped saying much after that, and by the time of Tim’s dishonorable discharge he’d fallen silent on the subject of his son. Maybe the Honky-Tonk was Lit’s hope for Tim’s rehabilitation.Almost at once, my gaze settled on a guy I would have sworn was him. He was somewhere in his mid-thirties, close to my age, and bore at least a superficial resemblance to Roy Littenberg. He had the same lean face, the distinctive jaw and jutting chin. He wore a dark purple shirt and plain mauve tie under a dark sport coat, jeans, desert boots. I’d caught him in conversation with a waitress, probably a dressing down, since she seemed upset. She had straight black hair, very glossy in the light, cut at an angle, with a line of blunt-cut bangs across the front. She wore black eyeliner and very red lipstick. I pegged her in her thirties, though close up she might have been older. She nodded, her face stony, and moved away, heading in my direction. She gave her order to the bartender, fussing with her order pad to cover her agitation. Hands shaking, she lit a cigarette, took a long drag, and then blew the smoke out in a thin jet. She left the cigarette in an ashtray on the bar.I swiveled slightly and spoke to her. “Hi. I’m looking for Tim Littenberg. Is he on the premises?”She looked at me, her gaze dropping to my jacket and then quizzically to my face again. She hiked a thumb in his direction. “Purple shirt,” she said.Tim had turned to greet a fellow in a tweedy sport coat, and I saw him signal the bartender to comp the guy to a drink. The two shook hands and Tim patted his back in a friendly gesture that probably didn’t have much depth. Roy Littenberg had been fair-haired. His son’s coloring was dark. His mouth was pouty and his eyes were darker than his father’s, deep-set, smudged with shadow. His smile, when it showed, never touched his eyes. His attention flicked restlessly from room to room. He must constantly estimate the status of his customers, gauging their ages, their levels of inebriation screening each burst of laughter and every boisterous interchange for the possibility of violence. Every hour the Honky-Tonk was open, the crowd became looser and less inhibited, louder, more aggressive as the alcohol went down.I watched him approach the bar, coming within a few feet of me. Nearby, the waitress turned abruptly with her tray to avoid contact with him. His gaze touched her and then drifted, caught mine, veered off, and then returned. This time his eyes held.I smiled. “Hi. Are you Tim?”“That’s right.”I held a hand out. “I’m Kinsey. I knew your father years ago. I was sorry to hear he died.”We shook hands. Tim’s smile was brief, maybe pained, though it was impossible to tell. He was lean like his father, but where Lit’s countenance was open and sunny, his son’s was guarded. “Can I buy you a drink?”“Thanks, I’m fine for now. The place really Jumps. Is it always like this?”He said, “Thursdays are good. Revving up for the weekend. This your first time in?” He was managing to conduct our conversation without being fully engaged. His face was slightly averted, his focus elsewhere: polite, but not passionate about the need to socialize.“I was in years ago. That’s how I knew your father. He was a great guy.” This didn’t seem to elicit any particular response. “Are you the manager?”“The owner.”“Really. Oh, sorry. No offense,” I said. “I could see you keeping a close eye out.”He shrugged.I said, “You must know Mickey Magruder.”“Yeah, I know Mickey.”“I heard he’d bought a part interest in the place, so I was hoping to run into him. He’s another cop from the old days. He and your dad were pals.”Tim seemed distracted. “Three Musketeers, right? I haven’t seen him for weeks. Would you excuse me?”I said, “Sure.” I watched him cross the room to the dance floor, where he intervened in an exchange between a woman and her date. The guy was stumbling against her and she was struggling to keep him upright. Other couples on the dance floor were giving them a wide berth. The woman finally gave him a shove, both annoyed and embarrassed by his drunkenness. By the time Tim reached them, one of his bouncers had appeared and he began to walk the fellow toward the door, using the kind of elbow grip employed by street cops and mothers with small children acting up in department stores. The woman detoured to a table and snatched up her jacket and her handbag, prepared to follow. Tim intercepted her. A brief discussion ensued. I hoped he was persuading her to take a taxi home.Moments later, he reappeared beside me, saying, “Sorry about that.”“I hope he’s not getting in a car.”“The bouncer took his keys,” he said. “We’ll let him chill out in back and then see he gets home in one piece. He tends to hassle people when he’s like that. Bad for business.”“I’ll bet.”His smile was directed somewhere to my left. He gave my arm a pat. “I better go check on him. Hope to see you again.”“You can count on it,” I said.There was only a momentary hitch in his otherwise smooth delivery. “Good deal. Anything you want, you can let Charlie know.” He caught the bartender’s eye and pointed at me. The bartender nodded and, with that, Tim was gone.I waited about a minute and then set my half-filled beer glass on the bar and made my way to the pay phones at the rear exit, near the office. I wanted to make sure I knew how to find him in his off-hours. I could have hung around until the place closed and followed him home, but I thought I’d try something more direct. I hauled out the phone book and looked up his address and phone number under Littenberg, Tim and Melissa.I leaned to my left and looked down the shadowy corridor, where I could see three blank doors in addition to the one leading to the office. One of the busboys came in from outside, a draft of cold air following him in. I straightened up, put a coin in the slot, and dialed, listening to a recorded female voice that apprised me of the time to the minute and the second. I said uh-huh, uh-huh, like I was oh-so interested. I watched until the busboy disappeared around the corner, moving into the bar.The area was quiet. I replaced the handset and proceeded along the corridor, opening one door at a time. The first door exposed a mop closet: brooms, gallon containers of disinfectants, kitchen linens stacked on the shelves. The second door turned out to be the employees’ lounge, lined with metal lockers and two sinks, an assortment of dumpy sofas, and a lot of ashtrays, most of which were full. No sign of the drunk; I wondered where he’d gone. The third door was locked. I leaned my head against the door, listening, but there was no sound.Tim’s office was just opposite. I crossed the corridor in two steps and gripped the doorknob with care. I turned it slowly to the right and pushed the door open the faintest crack. Tim was at his desk, his back to me, talking on the telephone. I couldn’t hear his conversation. I sincerely hoped he wasn’t busy putting out a contract on me. I eased the door shut and peeled my hand away from the knob to avoid any rattles and clicks. Time to get out. I really didn’t want anyone to find me back here. I returned to the main corridor, where I checked in both directions. There was no evidence of an alarm system: No passive infrared beams, no numbered key pad by the rear exit. Interesting.I drove home with an eye plastered to my rearview mirror. There was no reason in the world to think Tim’s call had anything to do with me. He had made a beeline to the office after I’d mentioned Mickey’s name, but that was the stuff of B-movies. Why would he rub me out? I hadn’t done anything. I hadn’t said a word about the ten grand he owed. I was saving that for next time. Actually, he could have paid it back, for all I knew.It was only 10 P.M. Lots of traffic on the freeway and none of it seemed sinister. Tim didn’t know me from Adam, so he couldn’t know where I lived or what kind of car I drove. Besides, Santa Teresa doesn’t have any mobsters, at least as far as I know.When I reached my neighborhood, I cruised the block, looking for a parking place that wasn’t shrouded in darkness. I spotted only one unfamiliar car, a dark-toned Jaguar sitting at the curb across the street from my apartment. I pulled up around the corner onto Bay and waited to make sure no one had followed me. Then I locked up and walked the half block back. I was feeling foolish, but I still preferred to listen to my intuition. I knew the gate hinge would squeak, so I avoided it and approached by traversing the neighbor’s yard along the wooden fence. Maybe I was being dumb, but I couldn’t help myself.When I reached the far side of Henry’s garage, I lifted my head above the fence and looked. I’d left the back light on, but now my porchlet was in shadow. Henry’s lights were out as well. A mist seemed to hover in the grass like smoke. I waited without moving, letting my eyes adjust to the dark. As in most cases, even the darkest night isn’t without its ambient illumination. The moon was caught in the branches of a tree. Splashes of light spilled down in an irregular pattern. I listened until the crickets began to chirp again.I divided Henry’s backyard into segments and scanned them one by one. Nothing to my immediate left. Nothing near his back step. Nothing near the tree. The garage cast a triangle of blackness onto the patio so that not all his lawn furniture was visible. Still, I could have sworn I saw a form: the head and shoulders of someone sitting in one of his Adirondack chairs. It could have been Henry, but I didn’t think so. I sank down below the fence. I reversed myself, easing back through the neighbor’s yard to the street beyond. The leather boots I wore weren’t designed for tiptoeing on wet grass, and I slipped as I crept along, hoping not to fall on my ass.Once I gained the street, I had to wipe some doggie doo off my shoe heel, lest the odor alone make a target of me. I fumbled in the bottom of my bag until I found my penlight. I shielded the narrow beam with the palm of my hand and swept the Jaguar. All four doors were locked. I half expected the vanity plate to read HITZ R US. Instead, it said DIXIE. Well, that was interesting. I approached the backyard this time from the neighbor’s property to the left of Henry’s, first navigating up their driveway, then making a wide circle across Henry’s yard along the rear flower beds. From this vantage point, I could see the silhouette of her tangled hair. She must have been dying to smoke. As I watched, her desire for a cigarette overrode her caution. I heard the flick of a lighter. She cupped a hand to her face and applied the flame to the end of a cigarette and inhaled with a nearly audible sigh of relief. No weapon, at any rate, unless she could wield one with her feet.By then, I was close to the back of the Adirondack. “Gee, Dixie. Never light up. Now all the snipers in the neighborhood can get a bead on you.”She gasped, nearly levitating from her seat as she whipped her head around. She grabbed the arm of her chair and her handbag tumbled from her lap. I saw the cigarette fly off in the dark, the ember making a most satisfactory arc before it was snuffed in the wet grass. She was lucky she hadn’t sucked it down her throat and choked to death. “Shit. Oh, shit! You scared the crap out of me,” she hissed.“What the hell are you doing here?”She had a hand to her chest, trying to still her wildly banging heart. She bent at the waist, hyperventilating. I was singularly unimpressed with the possibility of heart failure. If her heart seized, she died. I was not going to do CPR on her. She was wearing what looked like a flight suit, a one-piece design with a zipper up the front. The oversized, baggy look was offset by the fact that she had the sleeves rolled midway up her arm, thus demonstrating how petite she was. She stooped to pick up her shoulder bag, which was battered leather, shaped like a mail carrier’s pouch.She tucked it under one arm. She put a hand to her forehead and then to her cheek. “I need to talk to you,” she said, still sounding shaken.“Had you thought about calling first?”“I didn’t think you’d agree to see me.”“So you wait in the dark? Are you nuts?”“I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to scare you. The old gentleman in the house was up when I arrived an hour ago. I could see him in the kitchen when I came around the corner, so I unscrewed the porch bulb. I didn’t want him to notice and wonder what I was doing.”“What are you doing? I’m still not entirely clear.”“Could we go inside? I promise I won’t stay long. I didn’t bring a jacket and I’m freezing.”I felt a flash of annoyance. “Oh, come on,” I said.I set off across the yard. When I reached the porch, I gave the bulb a twist and saw the light come on. She followed me meekly. I took out my house keys and unlocked the door.I took a moment to slip my shoes off. “Wipe your feet,” I said crossly before I entered the living room.“Sorry. Of course.”I pulled out a kitchen stool for her and then went around the kitchen counter and retrieved a brandy bottle from the liquor cabinet. I took out two jelly glasses and twisted the cork, pouring us both two fingers. I tipped my head back and flung the brandy to the back of my throat. I swallowed liquid fire, my mouth coming open, invisible flames shooting out. Damn, that was nasty, but it brought relief. I shuddered involuntarily the way I do when swilling NyQuil. I was calmer by the time I looked up at her. She’d chug-a-lugged as I had, but she seemed better able to take the brandy in stride.“Thanks. That’s great. I hope you don’t mind if I have a cigarette,” she said, reaching into her bag as if with my consent.“You can smoke outside. I don’t want you smoking in here.”“Oh. Sorry,” she said, and put the pack away.“And quit apologizing,” I said. She’d come here for something. Time to get on with it. I said, “Speak,” like she was a dog about to demonstrate a trick.Dixie closed her eyes. “What Mickey and I did was inexcusable. You have every right to be angry. I was obnoxious on Monday when you came to the house. I apologize for that, but I was disconcerted. I always assumed you’d received my letter and elected to do nothing. I guess I enjoyed blaming you for being disloyal. It was hard to give that up.” She opened her eyes then and looked at me.“Go on.”“That’s it.”“No, it’s not. What else? If that’s all you wanted, you could have written me a note.”She hesitated. “I know you crossed paths with Eric on your way down the drive. I appreciated your keeping quiet on the subject of me and Mickey. You could have caused me a lot of trouble.”“You made the trouble. I didn’t have anything to do with it.”“I’m aware of that. I know. But I’ve never been sure if Eric knew about what happened.”“He never mentioned it?”“Nothing.”“Consider yourself lucky. I’d leave it at that, if I were you.”“Believe me, I will.”I felt myself subdivide, one part fully present, the other part watching from a distance. What she’d said so far was true, but there was bound to be more. Lacking my native talent in the liar-liar-pants-on-fire department, she couldn’t help but color slightly, a bright coin of pink appearing on each cheek.I said, “But what? You want assurances I’ll keep my mouth shut from here on out?”“I know I can’t ask.”“That’s correct. On the other hand, I don’t know what purpose it would serve. Believe it or not, just because you ‘done me wrong’ doesn’t mean I’d turn around and do likewise. Is there anything else?”Dixie shook her head. “I should probably go.” She picked up her handbag and began to search for her keys. “I know he invited you to dinner. Eric’s always been fond of you..”I thought, He has?“He’s anxious to have you over, and I hope you’ll agree. He might think it odd if you refused the invitation.”“Would you give it a rest. I haven’t seen either one of you in fourteen years, so why would it seem odd?”“Just think about it. Please? He said he’d probably call you early in the week.”“All right. I’ll consider it, but no guarantees. It seems awkward to me.”“It doesn’t have to be.” She stood and held out a hand to me. “Thank you.”I shook hands with her, though I wondered in the moment if we’d made some unspoken pact. She moved to the door, turning back, her hand on the knob.“How’d you do in the search for Mickey? Any luck?” she asked.“The day after I talked to you, a couple of LAPD detectives showed up on my doorstep. He was shot last week.”“He’s dead?”“He’s alive but in bad shape. He may not survive.”“That’s awful. That’s terrible. What happened?”“Who knows? That’s why they drove up here to talk to me.”“Have they made an arrest?”“Not yet. All I know about it is what they told me so far. He was found on the street a couple of blocks from his apartment. This was Wednesday of last week. He’s been in a coma ever since.”“I’m, I don’t know what to say.”“There’s nothing required.”“Will you let me know what you hear?”“Why would I do that?”In a fragile voice, she said, “Please?”I didn’t bother to reply. Then she was gone, leaving me staring at the door. I resented her thinking she had equal grieving rights. More than that, I wondered what she was really up to.
