---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "O Is for Outlaw - index_split_004.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - O Is for Outlaw"
tags: ["one", "henry", "box", "could", "back", "see", "said", "like", "time", "mickey", "old", "day", "though", "half", "car", "desk", "pulled", "door", "seemed", "life", "get", "turned", "got", "never", "go"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/OIsforOutlaw-indexsplit004html

---


Unknown
THREEThe drive back to Santa Teresa was uneventful, though I was so Juiced up on adrenaline I had to make a conscious effort not to speed. I seemed to see cops everywhere: two at an intersection directing traffic where a stoplight was on the fritz; one lurking near the on-ramp, concealed by a clump of bushes; another parked on the berm behind a motorist, who waited in resignation for the ticket to come. Having escaped from the danger zone, I was not only being meticulous about obeying the law but struggling to regain a sense of normalcy, whatever that is. The risk I’d taken at Teddy’s house had fractured my perception. I’d become, at the same time, disassociated from reality and more keenly connected to it so that “real life” now seemed flat and strangely lusterless. Cops, rock stars, soldiers, and career criminals all experience the same shift, the plunge from soaring indomitability to unconquerable lassitude, which is why they tend to hang out with others of their ilk. Who else can understand the high? You get amped, wired, blasted out of your tiny mind on situational stimulants. Afterward, you have to talk yourself down, reliving your experience until the charge is off and events collapse back to their ordinary size. I was still awash with the rush, my vision shimmering. The Pacific pulsated on my left. The sea air felt as brittle as a sheet of glass. Like flint on stone, the late morning sun struck the waves in a series of sparks until I half expected the entire ocean to burst into flames. I turned on the radio, tuning the station to one with booming music. I rolled down the car windows and let the wind buffet my hair.As soon as I got home, I set the cardboard box on the desk, pulled the storage company receipt from my pocket, and tossed the coveralls in the wash. I never should have broken into Teddy’s house that way. What was I thinking? I was nuts, temporarily deranged, but the man had irritated me beyond reason. All I’d wanted was a piece of information, which I now possessed. Of course, I had no idea what to do with it. The last thing I needed was to reconnect with my ex.We’d parted on bad terms, and I’d made a point of abolishing my memories of him. Mentally, I’d excised all reference to the relationship, so that now I scarcely allowed myself to remember his name. Friends were aware that I’d been married at the age of twenty-one, but they knew nothing of who he was and had no clue about the split. I’d put the man in a box and dropped him to the bottom of my emotional ocean, where he’d languished ever since. Oddly enough, while my second husband, Daniel, had betrayed me, gravely injuring my pride, he hadn’t violated my sense of honor as Mickey Magruder had. While I may be careless about the penal code, I’m never casual about the law. Mickey had crossed the line, and he’d tried dragging me along with him. I’d moved on short notice, willing to abandon most of my belongings when I walked out the door.The overload of chemicals began to drain from my system, letting anxiety in. I went into my kitchenette and tranquilized myself with the ritual of a sandwich, smoothing Jif Extra Crunchy peanut butter on two slices of hearty seven-grain bread. I arranged six bread-and-butter pickles like big green polka dots on the thick layer of caramel-colored goo. I cut the finished sandwich on the diagonal and laid it on a paper napkin while I licked the knife clean. One virtue of being single is not having to explain the peculiarities of one’s appetites in moments of stress. I popped open a can of Diet Coke and ate at the kitchen counter, perched on a stool with a copy of Time magazine, which I read back to middle. Nothing in the front ever seems to interest me.When I finished, I crumpled the paper napkin, tossed it in the trash, and returned to my desk. I was ready to go through the box of memorabilia, though I half dreaded what I would find. So much of the past is encapsulated in the odds and ends. Most of us discard more information about ourselves than we ever care to preserve. Our recollection of the past is not simply distorted by our faulty perception of events remembered but skewed by those forgotten. The memory is like orbiting twin stars, one visible, one dark, the trajectory of what’s evident forever affected by the gravity of what’s concealed.I sat down in my swivel chair and tilted back on its axis. I propped my feet on my desk, the box open on the floor beside me. A hasty visual survey suggested that the minute I’d walked out, Mickey’d packed everything of mine he could lay his hands on. I pictured him carting the box through the apartment, snatching up my belongings, tossing them together in a heap. I could see dried-out toiletries, a belt, junk mail and old magazines rubber-banded in a bundle, five paperback novels, and a couple of pairs of shoes. Any other clothes I’d left were long gone. He’d probably shoved those in a trash bag and called the Salvation Army, taking satisfaction in the idea that many much-loved articles would end up on a sale table for a buck or two. He must have drawn the line at memorabilia. Some of it was here, at any rate, spared from the purge.I reached in and fumbled among the contents, letting my fingers make the selection among the unfamiliar clusters, a grab bag of the misplaced, the bygone, and the abandoned. The first item I retrieved was a packet of old report cards, bound together with thin white satin ribbon. These, my Aunt Gin had saved for reasons that escaped me. She wasn’t sentimental by nature, and the quality of my academic performance was hardly worth preserving. I was a quite average student showing no particular affinity for reading, writing, or arithmetic. I could spell like a champ and I was good at memory games. I liked geography and music and the smell of LePage’s paste on black and orange construction paper. Most other aspects of school were terrifying. I hated reciting anything in front of classmates, or being called on perversely when my hand wasn’t even raised. The other kids seemed to enjoy the process, while I quaked in my shoes. I threw up almost daily, and when I wasn’t sick at school I would try to manufacture some excuse to stay home or go to work with Aunt Gin. Faced with aggression on the part of my classmates, I quickly learned that my most effective defense was to bite the shit out of my opponent. There was nothing quite as satisfying as the sight of my teeth marks in the tender flesh of someone’s arm. There are probably individuals today who still bear the wrathful half moon of dental scars.I sorted through the report cards, all of which were similar and shared a depressingly common theme. Scanning the written comments, I could see that my teachers were given to much hand wringing and dire warnings about my ultimate fate. Though cursed with “potential,” I was apparently a child with little to recommend her. According to their notes, I daydreamed, wandered the classroom at will, failed to finish lessons, seldom volunteered an answer, and usually got it wrong when I did.“Kinsey’s bright enough, but she seems absentminded and she has a tendency to focus only on subjects of interest to her. Her copious curiosity is offset by an inclination to mind everybody else’s business.”“Kinsey seems to have difficulty telling the truth. She should be evaluated by the school psychologist to determine...”“Kinsey shows excellent comprehension and mastery of topics that appeal to her, but lacks discipline..”“Doesn’t seem to enjoy team sports. Doesn’t cooperate with others on class projects.“Able to work well on her own.”“Undisciplined. Unruly.”“Timid. Easily upset when reprimanded.”“Given to sudden disappearances when things don’t go her way. Leaves classroom without permission.”I studied my young self as though reading about a stranger. My parents had been killed in a car wreck on Memorial Day weekend. I’d turned five on May 5 that year, and they died at the end of that month. In September, I started school, armed with a lunch box, my tablet paper, a fat, red Big Bear pencil, and a lot of gritty determination. From my current vantage point, I can see the pain and confusion I hadn’t dared experience back then. Though physically undersized and fearful from day one, I was autonomous, defiant, and as hard as a nut. There was much I admired about the child I had been: the ability to adapt, the resilience, the refusal to conform. These were qualities I still harbored, though perhaps to my detriment. Society values cooperation over independence, obedience over individuality, and niceness above all else.The next packet contained photos from that same period. In class pictures, I was usually half a head shorter than anyone else in my class. My countenance was dark, my expression solemn and wistful, as if I longed to be gone, which of course I did. While others in the class stared directly at the camera, my attention was inevitably diverted by something taking place on the sidelines. In one photograph, my face was a blur because I’d turned my head to look at someone in the row behind me. Even then, life must have seemed more interesting slightly off-center. What I found unsettling was the fact I hadn’t changed much in the years between.I probably should have been out somewhere looking for new clients instead of allowing myself to be distracted by the past. What could have happened that would result in Mickey’s belongings being sold at public auction? Not that it was any of my business, but then again, that’s exactly what gave the question its appeal.I went back to the cardboard box and pulled out an old tape recorder as big as a hardback book. I’d forgotten that old thing, accustomed by now to machines the size of a deck of cards. I could see a tape cassette inside. I pushed the PLAY button. No go. The batteries were probably already dead the day Mickey tossed it in the box with everything else. I opened my desk drawer and took out a fresh pack of C batteries, shoving four, end to end, into the back of the machine. I pushed PLAY again. This time the spindles began to turn and I heard my own voice, some rambling account of the case I was working on at the time. This was like historical data sealed in a cornerstone, meant to be discovered later after everyone was gone.I turned it off and set the tape machine aside. I reached into the box again. Tucked down along the side, I found ammo for the 9mm Smith & Wesson Mickey’d given me for a wedding present. There was no sign of the gun, but I could remember how thrilled I’d been with the gift. The finish on the barrel had been S & W blue, and the stock was checked walnut with S & W monograms. We’d met in November and married the following August. By then, he’d been a cop for almost sixteen years, while I’d joined the department in May, a mere three months before. I took the gift of a firearm as an indication that he saw me as a colleague, a status he accorded few women in those days. Now I could see there were larger implications. I mean, what kind of guy gives his young bride a semi-automatic on their wedding night? Impulsively, I pulled open my bottom drawer, searching for the old address book where I’d tucked the only forwarding information I’d ever had for him. The phone number had probably been relinquished and reassigned half a dozen times, the address just as long out of date.I was interrupted by a knock. I hauled my feet off the desk and crossed to the door, peering through the porthole to find my landlord standing on the porch. Henry was wearing long pants for a change, and his expression was distracted as he stared out across the yard. He’d turned eighty-six on Valentine’s Day: tall and lean, a man who never actually seemed to age. He and his siblings, who were respectively eighty-eight, eighty-nine, ninety-five, and ninety-six, came from such vigorous genetic stock that I’m inclined to believe they’ll never actually “pass.” Henry’s handsome in the manner of a fine antique, handcrafted and well constructed, exhibiting a polish that suggests close to nine decades of loving use. Henry has always been loyal, outspoken, kind, and generous. He’s protective of me in ways that feel strange but are welcome, nonetheless. I opened the door. “Hi, Henry. What are you up to? I haven’t seen you for days.”“Thank goodness you’re home. I have a dental appointment in” he paused to glance at his watch” approximately sixteen and three-quarter minutes, and both my cars are out of commission. My Chevy’s still in the shop after that paint can fell on it, and now I discover the station wagon’s dead. Can you give me a lift? Better yet, if you lend me your car, I can save you the trip. This is going to take a while and I hate to tie you up.” Henry’s five-window butter-yellow 1993 Chevy coupe had suffered some minor damage when several paint cans shuddered off the garage shelf during a cluster of baby earthquakes late in March. Henry’s meticulous about the car, keeping it in pristine condition. His second vehicle, the station wagon, he used whenever his Michigan-based sibs came to town.“I’ll give you a ride. I don’t mind a bit,” I said. “Let me grab my keys.” I left the door ajar while I snagged my handbag from the counter and fished out the keys from the outer compartment. I picked up my jacket while I was at it and then pulled the door shut behind me and locked it’ We rounded the corner of the building and passed through the gate. I opened the passenger side door and moved around the front of the car. He leaned across the seat and unlocked the door on my side. I slid under the wheel, fired up the ignition, and we were under way.“Great. This is great. I really appreciate this,” Henry said, his tone completely false.I glanced over at him, making note of the tension that had tightened his face. “What are you having done?”“A crown ‘ack ’ere,” he said, talking with his finger stuck at the back of his mouth.“At least it’s not a root canal.”“I’d have to kill myself first. I was hoping you’d be gone so I could cancel the appointment.”“No such luck,” I said.Henry and I share an apprehension about dentists that borders on the comical. While we’re both dutiful about checkups, we agonize over any work that actually has to be done. Both of us are subject to dry mouth, squirmy stomachs, clammy hands, and lots of whining. I reached over and felt his fingers, which were icy and faintly damp.Henry frowned to himself. “I don’t see why he has to do this. The filling’s fine, really not a problem. It doesn’t even hurt. It’s a little sensitive to heat, and I’ve had to give up anything with ice “The filling’s old?”“Well, 1984, but there’s nothing wrong with it.”“Talk about make-work.”“My point exactly. In those days, dentists knew how to fill a tooth. Now a filling has a limited shelf life, like a carton of milk. It’s planned obsolescence. You’re lucky if it lasts you long enough to pay the bill.” He stuck his finger in his mouth again, turning his face in my direction. “See this? Only fifteen years old and the guy’s already talking about replacing it.”“You’re kidding! What a scam!”“Remember when they put fluoride in the city water and everybody thought it was a communist plot? Dentists spread that rumor.”“Of course they did,” I said, chiming in on cue.“They saw the handwriting on the wall. No more cavities, no more business.” We went through the same duet every time either one of us had to have something done.“Now they’ve cooked up that surgery where they cut half your gums away. If they can’t talk you into that, they claim you need braces.”“What a crock,” I said.“I don’t know why I can’t have my teeth pulled and get it over with,” he said, his mood becoming morose.I made the usual skeptical response. “I wouldn’t go that far, Henry. You have beautiful teeth.”“I’d rather keep ’em in a glass. I can’t stand the drilling. The noise drives me crazy. And the scraping when they scale? I nearly rip the arms off the chair. Sounds like a shovel on a sidewalk, a pickax on concrete.”“All right! Cut it out. You’re making my hands sweat.”By the time I pulled into the parking lot, we’d worked ourselves into such a state of indignation, I was surprised he was willing to keep the appointment. I sat in the dentist’s waiting room after Henry’s name was called. Except for the receptionist, I had the place to myself, which I thought was faintly worrisome. How come the dentist only had one patient? I pictured Medicaid fraud: phantom clients, double-billing, charges for work that would never be done. just a typical day in the life of Dr. Dentifrice, federal con artist and cheater with a large sadistic streak. I did give the guy points for having recent issues of all the best magazines.From the other room, over the burbling of the fish tank, which is meant to mask the shrieks, I could hear the sounds of a high-speed drill piercing through tooth enamel straight to the pulsing nerve below. My fingers began to stick to the pages of People magazine, leaving a series of moist, round prints. Once in a while, I caught Henry’s muffled protest, a sound suggestive of flinching and lots of blood gushing out. Just the thought of his suffering made me hyperventilate. I finally got so light-headed I had to step outside, where I sat on the mini-porch with my head between my knees.Henry eventually emerged, looking stricken and relieved, feeling at his numbed lip to see if he was drooling on himself. To distract him on the ride home, I filled him in on the cardboard box, the circumstances under which it originated, Mickey’s paranoia, the John Russell alias, and my own B & E adventure at Ted Rich’s place. He liked the part about the dog, having urged me repeatedly to get one of my own. We had the usual brief argument about me and household pets.Then he said, “So, tell me about your ex. You said he was a cop, but what’s, the rest of it?”“Don’t ask.”“But what do you think it means, his being delinquent with his storage fees?”“How do I know? I haven’t talked to him in years.”“Don’t be like that, Kinsey. I hate it when you’re stingy with information. I want the story on him.”“It’s too complicated to get into. Maybe I’ll tell you later, when I’ve figured it out.”“Are you going to follow up?”“No.”“Maybe he got lazy about paying his bills,” he said, trying to draw me in.“I doubt it. He was always good about that stuff.”“People change.”“No, they don’t. Not in my experience.”“Nor in mine, now you mention it.”The two of us were silent for a block, and then Henry spoke up. “Suppose he’s in trouble?”“Serves him right if he is.”“You wouldn’t help?”:’What for?”‘Well, it wouldn’t hurt to check.”“I’m not going to do that.”“Why not? All it’d take is a couple of calls. What’s it going to cost?”“How do you know what it’d cost? You don’t even know the man.”“I’m just saying, you’re not busy, at least, as far as I’ve heard..”“Did I ask for advice?”“I thought you did,” he said. “I’m nearly certain you were fishing for encouragement.”“I was not.”I see.”“Well, I wasn’t. I have absolutely no interest in the man.”“Sorry. My mistake.”“You’re the only person in my life who gets away with this shit.”When I got back to my desk, the first thing my eye fell on was my address book lying open to the M’s. I flipped the book shut and shoved it in a drawer, which I closed with a bang.
