---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "P Is for Peril - index_split_003.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - P Is for Peril"
tags: ["office", "one", "could", "fiona", "back", "like", "might", "year", "said", "left", "look", "home", "odessa", "sure", "way", "lonnie", "account", "first", "purcell", "want", "two", "made", "get", "door", "got"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/PIsforPeril-indexsplit003html

---


"P" Is for Peril
Chapter 2Before I left Fiona’s, she gave me Melanie’s home address in San Francisco, along with her home and office numbers. I couldn’t imagine the need to call Fiona up there. She also gave me Crystal’s Horton Ravine address and phone number. I’d never met Detective Odessa, whom Fiona’d mentioned in passing, but a conversation with him was the first item on my list. Driving back into town, I noticed my stomach had begun to churn with anxiety. I tried to pinpoint my doubts, laying them out one by one, though not necessarily in the order of importance.1. I didn’t particularly like-or trust-Fiona. She hadn’t been candid with the cops and I didn’t think she was being entirely candid with me. Under the circumstances, I probably should have declined to take the job. Already I was regretting the haste with which I’d agreed.2. I wasn’t sure I could be effective. I’m often uneasy at the outset of an investigation, especially one like this. Nine weeks had passed since Dr. Purcell was last seen. Whatever the circumstances surrounding a disappearance, the passage of time seldom works in your favor. Witnesses embellish. They invent. The memory grows foggy. The truth tends to blur with repetition, and details are altered to suit various personal interpretations. People want to be helpful, which means they embroider their stories, coloring events according to their biases as the situation drags on. Entering the game this late, I knew the likelihood of my making any critical discovery was almost out of the question. Fiona did have a point in that sometimes a fresh perspective can shift the focus of an investigation. All well and good, but intuition was telling me that any break in the case was going to be the result of serendipity, a term synonymous with unadulterated dumb luck.3. I didn’t like the bullshit about the retainer.I stopped off at McDonald’s and ordered coffee and a couple of Egg McMuffins. I needed the comfort of junk food as well as the nourishment, if that’s what you want to call it. I munched while I drove, eating with such eagerness I bit my own index finger.I might as well take a moment here to identify myself. My name is Kinsey Millhone. I’m a licensed private investigator in Santa Teresa, California, which is ninety-five miles north of Los Angeles. I’m female, thirty-six, twice divorced, childless, and otherwise unencumbered. Aside from my car, I don’t own much in the way of material possessions. My business, Millhone Investigations, consists entirely of me. I was a cop for two years early in my twenties, and through personal machinations too tedious to explain, I realized law enforcement didn’t suit me. I was way too crabby and uncooperative to adjust to department regulations, with all the ethics clauses thrown in: I have been known to bend the rules. Plus, the shoes were clunky and the uniform and the belt made my ass look too wide.Having left gainful city employment, I apprenticed myself to a two-man office of private investigators, where I put in the hours necessary to apply for my license. I’ve been on my own now for a good ten years, licensed, bonded, and heavily insured. A good portion of the last decade, I spent pursuing arson and wrongful death claims for California Fidelity Insurance, first as a bona fide employee, later as an independent contractor. We came to a parting of the ways three years ago in October 1983. Since then, I’ve rented space from the law firm of Kingman and Ives, an arrangement that I’d begun to suspect was on the verge of change.For the past year, Lonnie Kingman had been complaining about the shortage of space. He’d already expanded once, taking over the entire third floor of a building he owns free and clear. He’d now purchased a second building, this one on lower State Street, where he intended to relocate as soon as escrow closed. He’d found a tenant for our current digs, and the only question that remained was whether I’d go with him or find an office of my own. I’m a loner at heart, and while I’m fond of Lonnie, the whole idea of working in close contact with other people had begun to get on my nerves. I found myself going into the office nights and weekends, spending half my days working from home-anything to create the sense of space and solitude. I’d talked to a real estate broker about month-to-month rentals, and I’d responded to several classified ads. So far I hadn’t seen anything that really struck my fancy. My requirements were modest: room for my desk, swivel chair, file cabinets, and a few fake plants. In addition, I pictured a small but tasteful executive potty. The problem was that everything I liked was too large or too expensive, and anything that fit my budget was too cramped, too shabby, or too far from downtown. I spend a lot of time at the Hall of Records and I like to be within walking distance of the courthouse, the police station, and the public library. Lonnie’s office was a haven, and he doubles as my attorney if the shit hits the fan-which it very often does. The choice was tough and I still wasn’t sure what I wanted to do.As soon as I reached the two-hundred block of east Capillo, where Lonnie’s office was located, I began the usual search-and-seizure mission, hunting for a parking place. One drawback to the current building was the tiny lot attached, which held only twelve cars. Lonnie and his partner were each assigned a slot, as were their two secretaries, Ida Ruth Kenner and Jill Stahl. The remaining eight spots went to the building’s other tenants, so the rest of us were forced to ferret out parking where we could. Today I nosed my way into a short length of curb between two commercial driveways, a spot I could have sworn was almost legal. It was only later I discovered I’d been wrong.I walked the five blocks to the office, climbed the requisite two flights of stairs, and let myself into the suite through an unmarked side door. I crossed the interior hallway to my office, unlocked the door, and stepped in, carefully avoiding Ida Ruth and Jill, who were deep in conversation a short distance away. I knew the subject matter would be the same one they’d been debating for the past two months. Lonnie’s partner, John Ives, had urged the firm to hire his niece as the receptionist when the position became open. Jeniffer was eighteen years old and a recent high school graduate. This was her first job and despite being given a lengthy written job description, she seemed thoroughly perplexed about what was expected of her. She showed up for work in T-shirts and miniskirts, her long blond hair hanging down to her waist, legs bare, feet shoved into wood-soled clogs. Her phone voice was chirpy, her spelling was atrocious, and she couldn’t seem to get the hang of coming in on time. She also took frequent two-to four-day vacations whenever her unemployed friends headed off to play. Ida Ruth and Jill were constantly exasperated at having to pick up the slack. Both bellyached to me, apparently reluctant to complain to Lonnie or John. Petty office politics have never held much appeal, which was yet another reason I was leaning toward a change in venue. Where I’d once been attracted to the sense of family I felt at the firm, now all I saw were attendant psychodramas. Jeniffer was Cinderella with a diminutive IQ. Ida Ruth and Jill, like the spiteful stepsisters, were simperingly nice to her in person but talked about her behind her back every chance they could. I’m not sure what part I played, but I did my best to avoid participation by hiding in my room. Clearly, I was no more adept at resolving conflicts than anyone else.In the interests of escape, I put a call through to the Santa Teresa Police Department and asked to speak to Detective Odessa. He was in a meeting, but the woman who took my call said he’d be free in a bit. I made an appointment for 10:30. I filled in a boiler plate contract and slipped it in an Express Mail envelope that I addressed to Fiona in care of Melanie’s home in San Francisco. I tucked the whole of it in my handbag and then sat at my desk, making deeply symbolic doodles on my blotter between rounds of solitaire. It’s not as though I didn’t have a ton of other work to do, but I found myself distracted by the information circulating through my brain. I finally pulled out a manila folder and a yellow legal pad and started taking notes.At 10:20 I locked my door and walked over to the post office, then continued to the police station, which was four blocks away. The morning air was chilly and the earlier pale sunlight had faded as the sky clouded over with the first hint of rain. The Santa Teresa “rainy” season is unpredictable. Intermittent periods of precipitation once began in mid-January and extend willy-nilly into early March. Of late, weather extremes in other parts of the world have resulted in capricious deviations. From late May until October, rain levels can still be measured in fractions of an inch, but the winter months now vary, and this one was shaping up to be one of the wettest in years. A cold front was moving down from Alaska, pushing a raw wind ahead of it. The tree branches moved restlessly, bending and creaking, while dried palm fronds broke loose and swept along the sidewalks like brooms. The lobby at the police station seemed cozy by comparison. On my left, a small boy sat waiting on the wooden bench while his father talked to the civilian clerk about copies of an accident report. I moved to the L-shaped counter, where a uniformed officer monitored the walk-in trade. I told him of my appointment and he relayed the information to Detective Odessa’s desk by phone. “He’ll be right out.”I waited where I was, glancing idly into Records across the counter to my right. My friend Emerald had taken early retirement, leaving me with no buddy to slip me information. She’d never actually violated department policy, but she’d come close a few times.Detective Odessa opened the door and stuck his head around the frame. “Ms. Millhone?”“That’s me.”“Vince Odessa,” he said, and we shook hands. “Come on back.”I said, “Thanks.” He handed me a visitor’s badge that I clipped to my lapel.He wore a blue dress shirt, a dark tie, chinos, dark socks, and shiny black shoes. His hair was dark and the back of his head was flat, as though he’d slept on his back for his entire infancy. He was taller than I, probably five foot nine to my five foot six. He held the door, allowing me to pass into the corridor in front of him. I paused and he took the lead. He walked ahead of me and turned left, passing through a door marked INVESTIGATIONS. I followed him through a warren of small offices. Over his shoulder, he said, “Shelly mentioned this was in regard to Dr. Purcell.”“That’s right. His ex-wife hired me to look into his disappearance.”Odessa kept his tone neutral. “I had a feeling that was coming. She was in here last week.”“What’d you make of her?”“I’ll have to take the Fifth. You on the clock?”“I haven’t deposited her check. I thought it’d be smart to talk to you first.”His “office” was tucked into a standard cubicle: shoulder-high gray walls carpeted in a tight synthetic loop. He took a seat at his desk, offering me the only other chair in the compact space. Framed photos of his family were arranged in front of him: wife, three daughters, and a son. A small metal bookcase behind him was neatly lined with department manuals, texts, and assorted law books. He was clean-shaven except for a line of whiskers he’d missed when his razor jumped over the cleft in his chin. His dark brows were fierce over dark blue eyes. “So what can I help you with?”“I’m not sure. I’d love to hear what you have, if you’re willing to share.”“I got no problem with that,” he said. He leaned forward, checking through a stack of thick files on one side of his desk. He pulled a three-ring binder from the bottom of the pile and set it in front of him. “Place is a mess. They tell us we’re switching over to computers in the next six, eight months. Paperless office. You believe that stuff?”“It’d be nice, but I doubt it.”“So do I,” he said. He leafed through numerous pages to the initial incident report. “I just got this promotion. I’m junior man on the team so this is a training exercise as far as they’re concerned. Let’s see what we got.” His gaze zigzagged along the page. “Crystal Purcell filed a missing persons Tuesday morning, September 16, seventy-two hours after the doctor failed to arrive home as scheduled. Records took the information. We’d had some residential burglaries that same weekend so I didn’t pick up the report until noon Thursday, September 18. As far as we could determine, Purcell wasn’t at risk, and there was nothing suspicious about the circumstances of his disappearance.” He paused to look at me. “Tell you the truth, we figured he’d gone off on his own. You know how it is. Half the time the guy shows up later with his tail between his legs. Turns out he’s got a girlfriend or he’s been off on a bender with the boys somewhere. Might be half a dozen explanations, all of them harmless. It’s aggravating to the wife, but nothing sinister.”He leaned back in his chair. “Half a million to a million people run away each year. It’s tough on family and friends. You’ve probably seen it yourself. At first, they get into denial. Can’t believe someone’d do such a rotten thing to them. Later, they get mad. Anyway, I called the current Mrs. Purcell and made an appointment for Friday afternoon. This was September 19. Frankly, I stalled, assuming she’d hear from him.”“Which she didn’t?”“Not then and not since. From what she says, he wasn’t suffering any physical condition that raised a flag on that score-no heart problems, diabetes, no history of mental illness. She said she’d called and talked to him at the office-this was September 12, shortly after lunch. Purcell told her he’d be late, but there was no mention of his not coming home at all. By Saturday morning, she was frantic, calling everyone she knew-friends, relatives, his colleagues. Hospitals, CHP, the morgue-you name it. There was no sign of him.“I sat with her for an hour, this was at the house in Horton Ravine. She’s got another place at the beach she stays most weekends. I went through the drill. Asked about habits, hobbies, job, country club memberships; had a look at his bedroom; went through his chest of drawers, phone bills, credit card receipts. I checked his credit card accounts for any recent activity, address book, calendar-covering all those bases.”“Nothing surfaced?”He held up a finger. “I’ll get to that in a minute. Over the next couple weeks, we went through the mail at his home and at the clinic, arranged a mail cover, talked to his associates, entered him in the DOJ missing persons system, and put a stop on his license plate. Meantime, you have to understand, we’re not talking about a crime here, so this is strictly a public service. We’re doing what we can, but there’s no evidence to suggest we got a problem on our hands.”“Fiona tells me his passport’s missing.”Odessa smiled ruefully. “So’s mine for that matter. Just because his wife can’t lay hands on it, doesn’t mean it’s gone. We did come across a recent statement for a savings account at Mid-City Bank. And this is what caught our attention. It looks like he made a series of cash withdrawals-thirty thousand dollars’ worth-over the past two years. Balance drops from thirteen grand to three in the past ten months alone. The last activity on the account was August 29. His wife doesn’t seem to know anything about it.”“You think he was prepping for departure?”“Well, it sure looks that way. Granted, thirty thou won’t get you far in this day and age, but it’s a start. He might’ve milked other accounts we haven’t come up with yet. It’s always possible the guy’s a gambler and this is his stake. She says he’s not, but she might’ve been kept in the dark.”“Could we go back to the passport? If Purcell left the country, wouldn’t Customs have a record of it?”“You’d think so. Assuming his was the passport he used. He might have traded in his personal ID-driver’s license, birth certificate, and passport-for a set of phony papers, which means he could have flown to Europe or South America under someone else’s name. Or he might have driven into Canada, booked a flight, and left from there.”“Or he might be lying low,” I said.“Right.”“Wouldn’t someone have spotted his car?”“No guarantee of that. He could’ve run it off a cliff, or driven into Mexico and sold it to a chop shop. Park a car like that in South Central and see how fast it disappears.”“What kind of car?”“Four-door Mercedes sedan. Silver. Vanity plate reads ‘Doctor P.’”I said, “You haven’t mentioned foul play.”“No reason to. Or if there is, I don’t see it. It’s not like we found blood stains in the parking lot outside the nursing home. No signs of a struggle, no evidence of assault, and no reason to believe he was forcibly removed. We canvassed the neighborhood, hitting every house within range. Nobody saw or heard a thing that night.”“Fiona thinks he might have left on his own. What’s your take on it?”“Personally, I don’t like the feel of it. Nine weeks with zip. You almost have to assume there’s something else going on. We’re beginning to backtrack, looking for anything we might have missed the first go-round.”“Did Fiona’s story affect the investigation?”“In what regard?”“All this talk of his past disappearances,” I said.Odessa waved that aside. “Air and sunshine. She says he’s gone off before. Maybe so, maybe not. I’m not entirely clear about her motive.”“According to her, she wants results.”“Sure, but who doesn’t? We’re cops, not magicians. We don’t perform miracles.”“Did you believe the story she told?”“I believe he left her. Whether he was having problems with the current Mrs. P. is anybody’s guess.” He paused. “Have you met Crystal yet?”I shook my head.Odessa lifted his brows and shook his hand as though he’d burned it. “She’s a beautiful woman. Hard to picture anyone walking out on her.”“You have a theory?”“Not me. From our perspective-so far-this is not a criminal matter. You got no crime, then there’s no Miranda and no need for search warrants, which makes our job a hell of a lot easier. We’re just a bunch of good guys trying to do the family a favor. Personally, I think things look bad, but I ain’t gonna say that to anyone else, including you,” he said.I indicated the file. “Mind if I take a look?”“Wish I could, but this is Paglia’s case and he’s hell on confidentiality. He doesn’t mind us passing on the gist of it when it seems appropriate. The point is to find the guy, which means we cooperate when we can.”“He won’t care if I go back and talk to some of these people?”“You’re free to do anything you want.”When he walked me out to the front, he said, “If you find him, let us know. He can stay gone if he wants, but I’d hate to keep putting in the hours if he’s off in Las Vegas with a snootful of coke.”“You don’t believe that.”“No, I don’t. Nor do you.”On the way back to the office, I did a two-block detour and made a stop at the bank. I filled out a deposit slip, endorsed Fiona’s check, and waited my turn in line. When I reached the window, I pointed to the account number printed on the face. “Could you verify the balance in this account? I want to be sure the check’s good before I make the deposit.” Another lesson learned the hard way: I don’t start work until a check has cleared.The teller, Barbara, was one I’d been dealing with for years. I watched while she typed in the account number on her computer keyboard and then studied the screen. She hit the Enter key once. Tap. Again. Tap. I watched as her eyes traced the lines of print.She looked back at my deposit slip and made a face. “This is covered, but it’s close. Want the cash instead?”“The deposit’s fine, but let’s do it before another check comes in and leaves her short.”
