---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "P Is for Peril - index_split_016.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - P Is for Peril"
tags: ["car", "crystal", "said", "see", "leila", "one", "like", "could", "door", "lloyd", "turned", "two", "around", "water", "stood", "back", "side", "road", "know", "fiona", "house", "head", "hill", "front", "lake"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/PIsforPeril-indexsplit016html

---


"P" Is for Peril
Chapter 15An accident scene at night is as bleak and gaudy as a carnival. It was now fully dark, close to eight P.M. The coroner’s car, the mobile crime lab, and a Ford sedan were parked on the berm, along with two patrol cars with red-and-blue bar lights flashing, radios squawking insistently between spurts of static. Two uniformed officers stood together talking while the police dispatcher, like a barker, issued a monotonous, nonstop account of crimes and misdemeanors in progress: complaints about noise, a call reporting a domestic disturbance in another part of town, a prowler, a drunk urinating on a public street. Santa Teresa is a town of eighty-five thousand with more crimes against property than crimes against persons.Five minutes after I’d spotted the submerged Mercedes, I’d scrambled up the hill and down the other side to the road. I’d crossed and climbed Fiona’s stairs two at a time, not pausing for breath until I reached the top. I pounded on her front door and rang the bell simultaneously, willing her to respond. I’d been reluctant to leave the scene unattended, but I had to notify the cops. I rang the bell again. Having observed Fiona’s house from Lloyd’s loft across the lake, it didn’t take much to persuade me she was still out somewhere. I trotted around the side of the house to the rear where the driveway entered the property from the roadway above. There were no cars on her parking pad and all three of her garage doors were down and locked.Fiona’s nearest neighbor was just across the road. I knew knocking on doors at random would be a pain in the ass. Though it wasn’t late, it was dark out. Everyone had heard stories about intruders using a ruse to gain entrance to the victim’s house. What choice did I have, short of hopping in my car and driving until I found a public phone? I rang the bell, talking to myself the whole time: Come on, come on, be here, help me out here. I peered through the glass side panels, which afforded me an abbreviated view of the foyer. I could see someone moving around in the kitchen, probably preparing supper. She appeared in the hall and approached the front door. I waved, trying to look like a law-abiding citizen instead of a cunning and devious crazed killer. She was middle-aged, in a sweater and slacks, with an apron tied around her waist. If she was apprehensive at the sudden summons, she gave no indication. She turned on the porch light and studied me with caution.I spoke loudly, hoping she could hear me through the glass. “I’m a friend of Fiona’s. She’s out and I need to use your phone.”I saw her eyes stray toward Fiona’s house while she assimilated the request. She made sure the burglar chain was secure, and then she opened the door a crack. I don’t remember now how I explained the situation, but I must have been persuasive because she let me in without argument and showed me to the phone.Seven minutes later, the first black-and-white patrol car had come careening up the road.Nearly two hours had passed and neighbors from many of the surrounding houses had straggled out to the road. They stood in clusters under the meager shelter of their umbrellas, conversing in subdued and fragmentary bursts while the rain pattered on. Word had apparently spread that the doctor’s car had been found. Under ordinary circumstances, they probably didn’t have much occasion to meet. None of the houses up here was built close together and with many residents holding day jobs, my guess was their paths seldom crossed. A rag-tag crew, they looked like they’d pulled on their coats and their rain boots in haste. They waited with patience, their vigil ritualistic, a community of the concerned conferring at this unprecedented gathering. A temporary fence of plastic pylons and tape prevented their approach. Not that there was much to see from where they stood. Looking toward the city, the roadway itself was cloaked in darkness, no streetlights within range. In the opposite direction, the asphalt petered out. Beyond the last cul-de-sac, there were only black and looming foothills, raw land knit together with sage and chaparral.I sat in my car, feeling tense with the cold. At intervals, I fired up the engine so I could keep the heater running and the windshield wipers on, though the steady thunk-thunk-thunk-thunk nearly put me to sleep. To my right, the hill rose at a thirty-degree angle for a hundred yards or so before it crested and curved down to the lake. From the water’s edge, the floodlights glowed eerily, silhouetting the few scrub trees stretched out along the crest. At intervals, the light was broken by shadows as the police went about their business. I’d spoken briefly with Odessa when he’d first reached the scene. He’d asked me to stay and said they were putting a diver in the water to check the car’s interior before they hauled it out of the lake. He’d set off up the long slope and I settled in for the wait.At some point, Leila had appeared, accompanied by her stepfather, Lloyd, who’d come home while I was in the process of discovering Dow’s car. They stood to one side under a black umbrella, maintaining a distance from the neighbors. I was guessing the two had been attracted by the lights and had hopped in Lloyd’s car. For once, Leila seemed to be experiencing an emotion other than boredom or contempt. With her thick black mascara and heavily shadowed lids, she looked like a waif, big-eyed and solemn, shivering uncontrollably. I knew I should go over and introduce myself to Lloyd, but I couldn’t bring myself to do it. Down the road, I spotted two minicam crews, one from KWST-TV, the other from KEST-TV. The blond reporter from KEST was already picking up film clips and interviews for the eleven o’clock news. She stood under a big black umbrella, talking to one of the neighbors. I didn’t see any other reporters, but they were doubtless around somewhere.I adjusted my rearview mirror and watched as a pair of headlights swept into view around the curve in the road. I was hoping to see Fiona, but the vehicle turned out to be Crystal’s white Volvo. She slowed as she approached. She waited while a smattering of people ambled out of the roadway and passed in front of her, and then pulled in and parked on the berm just ahead of me.I grabbed my slicker from the backseat and held it over my head as I left the comfort of my VW and moved gingerly along the road to her car. She turned and caught sight of me and rolled down her window. Her face was drawn, her hair pulled back in an untidy knot at the nape of her neck. Gone were the black slacks and sweater she’d worn earlier. She looked like she’d dressed in haste, pulling on jeans and a gray utilitarian sweatshirt bearing the name of our gym. She said, “I was already in my robe and slippers when the officer came to the door. He wanted to bring me over in his patrol car, but I wanted my own wheels. What’s happening?”“Nothing much. This is worse than a movie set, with all the people standing around. Where’s Anica?”“She had to get back to school. Hop in.”I said, “Thanks.” I opened the door and slid into the front seat. Behind me, Griffith’s car seat was buckled into place, the surrounding area decorated with an assortment of cookie crumbs and broken pretzels. A plastic baby bottle filled with apple juice had left a sticky residue in the spot where I rested my hand. There was a pink plush squirrel on the floor by my feet. I pictured him flinging his binky, his bottle, his snacks, and stuffed animals, a hurricane of objects announcing his presence. The interior air smelled of flowers and spice, Crystal’s cologne.I said, “How are you?”“Numb.”I said, apropos of nothing, “The car might have been abandoned.”“Let’s hope that’s all it is.” She angled the rearview mirror in her direction and ran a knuckle under her lower lashes where her eyeliner had smeared. She pushed the mirror back and slouched down on her spine. She leaned her head back on the seat and closed her eyes. In profile, I could see the irregularities of her features. Her nose was too sharp, her lower jaw too narrow for the width of her brow. Properly done up, she seemed more intimidating than she was in the moment. “When did you get here?” she asked, as though talking in her sleep.“Hours ago. At six.”“They said not to hurry. I was watching TV when the officer arrived at the door.”“You’re lucky. I’m starving. I missed dinner. I’m about to eat my arm.”Crystal reached over to the glove compartment and flipped the door down. “Try this.” She removed a battered Hershey’s bar and passed it over to me. “How’d they find the car?”“I was the one who spotted it and called 9-1-1. The cops are over there now doing god knows what.” I removed the outer wrapper and opened the white inner paper liner. The scent of chocolate rose like a vapor. I broke the candy bar into perfect sections and placed one on my tongue. I could almost read the engraved letter H as I pressed one softening chocolate square against the roof of my mouth.“How’d you know the car was his?”“The vanity license plate.”We were silent. Crystal turned on the radio and then thought better of it and turned it off again. The rain on the roof was a soft percussion, a drummer’s brushes on cymbals. The atmosphere was oddly intimate. We were both out of our natural habitats, constrained by the unfamiliar setting, bound by the wait. “I take it they haven’t pulled the car out of the water yet,” she said at length.“They’re waiting for the tow truck. Odessa said he’d let us know as soon as there’s something to report.” I ate an E and stuck the rest of the Hershey’s in my shoulder bag. I crossed my arms in a vain attempt to get warm.Crystal made a sound that was half sigh and half something else: tension, impatience, simple weariness. “I knew he was dead. That’s the only explanation that made any sense. I told you he wouldn’t walk off and leave Griff.”“Crystal, they haven’t even brought the car up. We don’t know he’s in there.”“He’s there. Leila’s going to freak.”“How so? She doesn’t like him.”“Of course not. She treated him like dirt. How’s she going to make her peace with that?”I hesitated, wanting to press. She was more vulnerable than I’d seen her. This might be my only opportunity. “What’s her anger about?”“It’s too complicated to go into.”“Nothing’s too complicated if he’s dead.”Crystal roused herself and turned. “Why should I tell you? You’re not working for me.”“I’m not working against you, either. What’s her problem?”“Why is that any concern of yours?”“It isn’t, if you put it that way, but it’s going to get worse.”“I don’t doubt that,” she said. And after a long pause, “There’s been a certain amount of trauma in Leila’s life. She needs help sorting it out.”“She’s seeing a shrink?”“She’s been seeing one for years. At first, three times a week. Now it’s down to twice a month on weekends when she’s up from school.”“He has appointments on weekends?”“It’s a she.”“Sorry. I didn’t think psychiatrists were that obliging.”“This one is. She’s truly fabulous with kids. This is the fifth shrink Leila’s seen and I was at my wit’s end.”“How’d you find her?”“We were lucky for once. Charlotte Friedman’s a woman Anica went to school with. Her husband retired and they moved here from Boston.”“What sort of trauma? I’m still not getting it.”Crystal seemed to debate with herself. She stared straight ahead and when she spoke her tone was as flat and distant as an old phonograph record. “I had a little boy who drowned. Of course, it affected us all. That was the beginning of the end where Lloyd and I were concerned. Some things you never recover from. A child’s death is one.”“What happened?”“That was Jordie. My sweet one. He was eighteen months old. I was working one night and left him with the woman next door. She was talking on the phone when Jordie toddled out the screen door and fell in the pool. By the time she found him and called the paramedics, he couldn’t be revived.”“I’m sorry.”“I thought I’d die, but it was worse for Leila. Children aren’t prepared for loss. They don’t understand and it’s hard to explain death in terms that they comprehend. I’ve never been religious. I didn’t want to sell her a fairy tale, especially one I wasn’t buying myself. Dr. Fried-man says when faced with the death of a sibling, some children disconnect. They act like nothing’s happened. Others, like Leila, start acting out. She’s difficult. You’ve seen it yourself. Rebellious. Emotional. I’ve talked to Charlotte-with Leila’s permission of course. Charlotte feels Leila’s behavior is her way of distancing herself, creating a barrier between herself and a world that she finds treacherous. If she doesn’t care about anyone, she can’t be hurt. At any rate, I know I’m protective. I’m not even sure how I’m going to tell her about all this.”“She’s here. Didn’t you see her back there with Lloyd?”Crystal sat up abruptly. “I had no idea. Where?”“Far side of the road, about three cars back. At least they were a while ago.”“I better see how she’s doing.” Crystal reached around the seat for a big black umbrella that was stashed on the floor. She opened the car door a crack and stuck the umbrella out, popping the automatic latch that caused it to thwop into full sail.“Thanks for the Hershey’s. You saved my life.”“You’re welcome.”The tow truck appeared, its headlights illuminating the roadway as far as the next curve. I opened the door on my side, tented my slicker over my head, and got out, closing the door behind me. I turned, watching as the tow truck driver’s assistant hopped out of the cab. Crystal passed him, trekking back along the road while the driver did a three-point turn and started backing up the slope. The heavy tires slipped, chewing two channels in the grass. The driver craned a look over his shoulder, one hand on the wheel. His assistant whistled sharply and gave rolling-arm instructions about the angle of ascent. The blond reporter caught sight of Crystal and moved to intercept her. Crystal shook her head, waving her off.I retreated to my car and turned the key in the ignition. The rain was reduced by now to an icy mist, soaking the unwary onlookers by slow degrees. The interior temperature had dropped while I was gone and the tepid breeze generated by the heater wasn’t even as effective as my own breath. I watched the tow truck slip sideways and then lumber backward up the hill to the top. I couldn’t imagine how they’d manage to haul the Mercedes out of the water and up the sodden hill.I turned, looking over the backseat to check Crystal’s progress. She’d reached Leila, who was standing by the side of the road with Lloyd. Lloyd had his arm around her, but the minute Leila saw Crystal she fled to her mother’s embrace. Crystal held her and rocked her where they stood, resting her face in Leila’s hair. After a moment, the three conferred; Leila looking miserable, Lloyd withdrawn. Whatever the debate, it was evident that Crystal prevailed. Mother and daughter passed my car in their return to the station wagon. Crystal was talking earnestly while Leila wept without sound. I watched as she settled her daughter in the front seat and then went around the rear of the car and slid in under the wheel.I adjusted my rearview mirror, keeping a watchful eye on Lloyd, who’d started toward his car, his head bent, hands in his jacket pockets. Maybe the two were in competition, playing good parent. Leila was the prize and Lloyd had been forced to forfeit this round. In mirror-reverse, I saw him light up a cigarette and belatedly I smelled smoke drifting through the damp night air. Idly, I wondered how far out into dark I’d have to go so I could pee without being arrested for indecent exposure.Detective Odessa, in a hooded water-repellent jacket, appeared at the crest of the hill and began his descent, his footing as tenuous as mine had been. He spotted my VW and began to tack in my direction. I leaned over and cranked down the window a couple of inches. He reached the car and peered in. Drizzle had collected on the shiny surface of his jacket and the water slid in runnels along the stitching in the seams. His nose was slightly too prominent and something in the shape of it left him just short of handsome. He gestured toward the work lights on the far side of the hill. “I want you to meet Detective Paglia.”I said, “Sure.” I rolled up the window and killed the engine. I got out, taking a moment to shrug into my slicker before I followed him up the hill. The two of us struggled together, Odessa holding on to my arm as much for stability as for support.I said, “How’s it going?”“It’s a bitch,” he said. “I see Crystal’s here. I sent an officer to the house. I thought she should know what was happening.”“What about Fiona? Anybody heard from her?”“Nope. We notified the daughter, but she can’t make it over here until the nanny gets back from dinner.”“Does she know where her mother is?”“Not offhand. She says she’ll put in a few calls and see if she can track her down. Otherwise we wait and hope she comes home.”We scrambled the last few yards to the top of the hill and stood there together staring down at the lake. The light from the flood lamps had washed the color from the scene. Steam rose like smoke where the rain came in contact with the hot metal flanges. An assortment of people stood in clusters, apparently waiting for additional technicians or equipment. I could see an eerie green glow moving under the surface of the water as a search went on in the depths. With the angle of the floodlights, the butt end of the Mercedes glimmered incongruously. “Is he in there?”“Don’t know yet. We’ve got a diver in the water. The shelf drops off sharply to a depth of twenty feet... this is five or six yards out. Car got hung up against a boulder or it’d be down on the bottom and we’d be out of luck.”The diver surfaced in a dark blue wet suit and hood, a compressed-air cylinder strapped to his back. He removed his mouthpiece and let it dangle as he waded ashore, algae clinging to his fins. He lifted off his face mask and left it resting on the top of his head like a hat. Once on shore, he was intercepted by the coroner and another man, both in raincoats, who listened while he reported, complete with gestures.Meanwhile, the tow truck had backed down within range of the shore. Two men in hip boots and yellow slickers had entered the water in preparation for the salvage operation. One was already attaching a chain to the Mercedes’s axle. As I looked on, one of the two men miscalculated and slipped into deeper water, his slicker billowing out around him like a deflated life raft. He flailed, cursing, while his partner snorted with suppressed laughter and pushed forward through the water to lend him a hand.Odessa nodded in the diver’s direction. “That’s Paglia with the coroner.”“I gathered as much.”As if on cue, the other detective turned and caught sight of Odessa and me. He excused himself and headed in our direction across soft ground already trampled with footprints. Days of rain had obliterated any trace of tread marks, but the projected path of the car had been secured and searched. Evidence was doubtless in very short supply after so much time had passed. When he reached us, Detective Paglia held out his hand. “Ms. Millhone. Jim Paglia. Con Dolan’s spoken to me about you.” His voice was deep and uninflected. I placed him in his fifties. His head was shaved, his freckled forehead etched with a trellis of vertical and horizontal lines.We shook hands and said hi-how-are-you-type things. Lieutenant Dolan had been in charge of the homicide unit until a heart attack dictated his early retirement. “How’s Dolan doing these days?”“So-so. Good, but not great. He misses the job.” Paglia’s eyebrows were black twists that tipped up at the outer corners like a pair of wings. He wore small oval glasses with thin metal frames. If the raindrops falling on the lenses annoyed him, he gave no sign of it. He’d been smoking a cigarillo with a white plastic tip, dead by the look of it, extinguished by the rain. He removed it from his mouth and glanced at the tip. “We owe you a big one. How’d you happen to come down?”Odessa touched my sleeve. “You two go ahead. I’ll be right back.”I watched him cross to the diver, whom he engaged in conversation out of earshot of those nearby. I turned my attention to Detective Paglia, whose gaze had settled unrelentingly on mine. I pegged him as ex-military, a man who’d seen death and dying at close range, possibly administering a fair amount of it himself. His manner suggested friendliness without the irksome encumbrance of any underlying warmth. If he was personable, it was a trait he’d acquired by meticulous application of the “personable behavior” rules he’d observed in the world around him. If he was pleasant, it was because pleasantries usually got him what he wanted, which in this case was aid, information, cooperation, and respect. If I were a career criminal, I’d be wary of this man. As it was-given my past tendencies toward lying, breaking and entering, and petty theft-I made certain to frame my explanation with care. While I didn’t imagine he suspected me of anything, I wanted to appear honest and artless-not difficult since (in this one rare instance) what I had to offer was the truth. “I’m not sure how to describe the process. I was up at Lloyd’s. He’s Crystal’s ex-husband.”“Leila’s step-dad.”“Right. This morning, she left boarding school without permission and Crystal figured she was headed for his place. I told Crystal I’d see if I could track her down, so I began cruising the area there at Little Pony Road and the 101. She must have hitchhiked because I spotted her walking on the berm. I talked her into letting me drive her up to Lloyd’s. He was gone when we got there, so she let us into the house. His is that A-frame,” I said, and pointed to the far side of the lake. Under the weight of Paglia’s gaze, my tone sounded false and I found myself adding a few extraneous details. “Well, it’s actually not his. He’s house-sitting for a friend who went to Florida. Anyway, I was just messing around while we waited for him to show. Leila was watching TV and I went up to the loft. I saw the telescope and thought it’d be interesting to take a peek. I was surprised to see where I was. I hadn’t realized that section of Gramercy put him directly across the reservoir from Fiona.”“You think there’s a connection?”“Between Lloyd and Fiona? I don’t know, but I doubt it. I’ve never heard anything to that effect.”He took out an Altoids box. He opened the lid and deposited the dead butt. I could see he’d filled the bottom of the tin with ash, his way of avoiding contamination at the scene. He returned the box to his raincoat pocket and his gray eyes met mine. I said, “Do you consider this a crime scene?”“Suicide’s a crime,” he said. “Go on with your story.” His lower teeth were buckled together in the center and rimmed with stains. It was the only thing about him that seemed out of control.“When I looked through the telescope I saw the dog-this is a German shepherd named Trudy. I’d seen her up here on my two visits to Fiona’s house and she was always over in this area, barking her head off.”Paglia said, “Dogs can smell a body even under water.” This was the first piece of information he’d offered me.“Really. I didn’t know that. I could see she was excited, but I had no idea why. Aside from Trudy, I could see some scarring on that boulder halfway up the slope.” Again, I pointed like a fifth-grader giving an oral report. “There was also damage to the vegetation, saplings snapped off. At first I figured somebody must have backed a trailer down to launch a boat, but then I caught sight of the posted warning and I remembered that swimming and boating were forbidden.”He seemed to study me, his expression one of calculated kindness. “I still don’t understand how you made the connection.”“The idea just suddenly made sense. Dr. Purcell was last seen at the clinic. I’d heard he was on his way up here to see Fiona so I-”“Who told you that?”“A friend of Purcell’s, a fellow named Jacob Trigg. Dow told him he had a meeting scheduled with her that night.”“You talk to her about this?”“Well, I asked her. Why not? I was pissed. I work for her. She should have given me the information the moment I hired on.”“What’d she say?”“She claims he didn’t show, called it a ‘miscommunication.’ I assumed he stood her up and she was too embarrassed to admit it.”“Too bad she didn’t mention it to us. We could have canvassed up here. Somebody might’ve heard the car. Nine plus weeks later, who’s going to remember?”Behind him, I heard the high whine of the gear, the rumble as the cable was wound around the drum, dragging the Mercedes from the lake. Water gushed from the open windows, from the underside, from the wheel mounts. Nearby, the coroner’s van was parked in the grass, its rear doors open. The coroner’s assistant and a uniformed officer were removing a long metal trunk, which I recognized as the stainless steel tank in which a floater could be sealed. Paglia said, “Kinsey.” I turned my gaze back to his. I felt cold. “The diver says there’s someone in the front seat.” The Mercedes was now suspended in a forward tilt, front end down, three of the four windows opened. Lake water poured from every crack and crevice, draining through the floorboards, splashing onto ground already soaked by days of rain. I watched, my responses suspended as the vehicle was hauled partway up the slope, gushing like a tank that had sprung a sudden leak. The window on the driver’s side had been shattered, the bottom half still a maze of crazed glass, the upper portion gone. In the front seat, I caught a glimpse of a vaguely human shape, amorphous, all bloat and slime, face turned toward the window gap as if peeking at the view. After weeks in the water, the once-living flesh was bloodless, bleached a pearly white. He still wore his suit coat, but that was all I could see of him from where I stood. I turned my head abruptly and made an involuntary sound. The glue holding his bones together had loosened and given way so that he seemed flaccid, indifferent, his eye sockets swimming with a pale gelatin. His mouth was open, his jaw relaxed. His lips had widened in a final expression of joy or surprise-a howl of rage perhaps. “I’ll be in the car,” I said.Paglia didn’t hear me. He was heading for the Mercedes. The morgue crew stood back. Peripherally, I saw flashes as the police photographer began to document her work. I couldn’t watch any longer. I couldn’t be in that place. These people were schooled in the sight of death, tutored by its odors, by its poses, by the peculiar posture of bodies caught in their final bow to life. Ordinarily at such a scene, after the first jolt of revulsion, I can become detached. Here, I couldn’t manage it, couldn’t shake off the feeling that I was in the presence of something evil. Purcell-assuming the body was his-had either killed himself or been killed. There was no way he could have driven up that hill and down into the lake by accident.
