---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "P Is for Peril - index_split_005.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - P Is for Peril"
tags: ["one", "dow", "back", "time", "said", "know", "like", "could", "see", "crystal", "go", "right", "get", "leila", "really", "white", "took", "home", "look", "door", "going", "far", "still", "year", "face"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/PIsforPeril-indexsplit005html

---


"P" Is for Peril
Chapter 4During the time I was alone, I took advantage of the lack of supervision to do a quick assessment of the place. Ordinarily, if left to my own devices, I’d have opened a few drawers, sorted through the mail, perhaps even scanned a letter or a credit card statement. There’s ever so much information embedded in our correspondence, which is why those pesky federal mail-tampering penalties are so severe. Hunt as I might, however, I couldn’t find anything of interest and I was reduced to gazing at home furnishings, trying to calculate the value-not a specialty of mine. In one corner, there was a round table draped with a floor-length cloth, surrounded by four chairs wearing those little matching dresses with the bows tied in back. I pulled up one skirt and discovered a common metal folding chair. The table itself was constructed of a round of raw plywood bolted to a cheap set of legs. This was a workaday metaphor for much that I observe during the course of my work: What looks good on the surface usually turns out to be crap underneath.To my left, on the far wall were floor-to-ceiling bookcases, a sliding ladder affixed to a railing midway up. Closer inspection revealed shelves lined with romance novels by women writers with made-up-sounding names. A free-standing Swedish fireplace provided warmth on chilly nights without obstructing the ocean view. A long angled counter separated the high-tech kitchen from an eating area that looked out at the beach. To the right, there was a staircase that I surveyed with longing. The second and third floors probably contained the bedrooms, perhaps a study or home office where all the yummy paperwork was kept. Of course, it was likely her mail was sent to the main residence in Horton Ravine, which might explain the absence of letters sitting out in plain view.I heard someone cross the room just above me, the muffled thump of bare feet on bare hardwood floors. I glanced up without thinking, following the sound. Belatedly, I realized there was a “window” in the ceiling, clear glass or Lucite maybe thirty-six inches square with a view into the bedroom directly above. Startled, I watched Crystal Pur-cell parade naked across my line of view. Thirty seconds later, she padded down the stairs, still barefoot, wearing wash-faded jeans cut so low her belly button showed. Her short-cropped T-shirt was gray, the neck of it pulled out of shape by years of wear. By my reckoning, she hadn’t had enough time to pull on any underwear.Her hair was an upscale-salon blond, a little longer than shoulder length, framing her face in a tangle of soft curls. A few strands along her neck were still damp from the shower. Holding out her hand, she said, “Hello, Kinsey. I’m sorry to keep you waiting. I just came back from a run and wanted to get rid of all the sweat and sand.” Her grip was strong, her voice mild, her manner pleasant but subdued. “Where’s Anica? Did she leave? I asked her to keep you company until I came down.”“She just left. She asked if you’d call her as soon as you’re free.”Crystal moved into the kitchen, sailing her comments in my direction while she crossed to the stainless steel refrigerator and removed a bottle of wine. “She’s been a godsend, especially with Leila coming home on weekends. It’s been hard enough without worrying about her on top of everything else. Anica’s the counselor at Leila’s private school.”“That’s what she said. Must be nice having her so close.”“She’s a good friend. One of the few, I might add. Dow’s Horton Ravine pals view me as beneath contempt.”I couldn’t think how to respond so I kept my mouth shut. I moved as far as the counter, keeping her in view. I could see evidence of Griff’s dinner. The tray on his chrome-and-plastic high chair still bore a three-sectioned Beatrix Potter plate, with drying curds of scrambled egg, toast crusts, and a smear of applesauce. A bib had been laid over the back of the chair.“How long have you known her?”“Really, not that long. Sometime early last spring. I saw her out on the beach and then later at Fitch at one of those dreadful parent-teacher conferences. Did she offer you a drink?”“She did. I thought I’d better not have anything just yet.”“Really. How come?” She took a corkscrew from the kitchen drawer and began opening the bottle as she moved to the kitchen cabinet and fetched herself a glass.“I don’t know. It doesn’t seem professional, given that I’m here on business.”Bemused, she took out a second glass and held it up. “You sure? It won’t count against you. We can sit out on the deck and sip wine while we watch the sun go down.”“Oh, all right. Why not? You talked me into it.”“Great. I hate to drink by myself.” She held out the glasses and the bottle. “If you’ll take these, I’ll make us up a plate of nibbles. That way we won’t get looped... or any more looped than we choose.”I took the glasses in one hand, the stems forming an X, and tucked the bottle of white wine in the crook of my arm. I crossed the great room and pushed open one of the French doors with my elbow. Once on the deck, I set the items on a weathered wooden table between two wood-and-canvas sling chairs. The wind gusting in from the ocean was damp and smelled pungent, like an oyster liqueur. I took a deep breath, picking up the faint taste of salt at the back of my throat.Two palms near the house made tiny scratching noises as the fronds swept back and forth against the graying exterior. I moved to the edge of the deck, my gaze sweeping along the surf. The beach was deserted, while out on the ocean, white lights were showing on the oil rigs like diamonds on dark velvet. The weather bore the edgy feel of danger. I sat down, crossing my arms as I huddled against the chill. It was nearly twilight; a gradual, indiscriminate darkening, with no color visible through the heavy clouds. Far out on the horizon, I could see patches of silver where rays from the late sun pierced the marine layer. I heard the distant whine of a commuter plane approaching along the coast. Through the French doors, the living room looked clean and cozy. I was grateful for the protection afforded by the long-sleeved turtle neck under my blazer. Idly, I glanced at the Chardonnay bottle with its classy black-and-silver label. I leaned closer. The price tag, $65, was more than I’d paid for my telephone and electric bills combined that month.Two ornamental lamps came on, and Crystal, still barefoot, emerged from the house, carrying a tray of cheese and crackers, arranged with grapes and apple wedges. She’d pulled on a heavy navy sweater that hung, fetchingly, almost as far as her knees. She left the door open behind her, glancing over at me. “You look cold. I’m used to the ocean, but you must be freezing. Why don’t I fire up the outside heaters? It’ll just take a sec. You can pour the wine, if you would.”I did as she suggested and then watched as she hunkered next to a fat propane canister with a heater element affixed. Her fingernails and toenails were both done in a French manicure, white defining the half-moon at the base of the nail and under the rim. The look was clean, though-like her hair-the effect probably cost her dearly and had to be redone every other week. It wasn’t hard to imagine her doing a bump-and-grind routine. She turned a valve, using an electric match to ignite the hissing gas as it escaped. Soon after, the reddening coils glowed nearly white. She lit the second of the two heaters, turning them to face us so that warmth poured out across the space between us. “Is that better?”“Much.”“Good. If you need something warmer, don’t hesitate to say so. I have a huge supply of sweaters in the downstairs closet.”We sipped wine in silence while I tried to decide how and where to begin. “I appreciate your taking the time to talk to me.”She smiled faintly. “I considered hiring a detective myself half a dozen times, but I didn’t want to undermine the police. I have every confidence in the job they’re doing. Apparently, Fiona doesn’t.”“She likes the idea of someone devoted solely to the family’s interests. The police have other cases requiring their more immediate attention.” I paused. “I just want to be clear that any comments you care to make will be safe with me. If you have relevant information, I’ll report it to her, but nothing else gets passed on. You can be as candid as you like.”“Thank you. I was wondering about that.”“I’m assuming there’s no love lost.”“Hardly. Fiona’s done everything in her power to make my life hell on earth.” Her face was angular, mouth wide. Her eyes were gray, her brows pale, her lashes thick and black. Aside from mascara, she seemed to wear little or no makeup. I could tell she’d had her eyes done and probably her nose as well. In fact, just about everything I was looking at had been augmented or improved by some merry band of surgeons working on her, piece by piece. Crystal’s smile was brief. Look. I know she’s busy painting a picture of herself as the victim in all of this, betrayed and put-upon. The truth is, she never gave Dow a thing. It was all take, take, take. Dow reached a point where he had nothing left. Poor guy. When I think of the hours he worked, all the sacrifices he made for them, and in exchange for what? For years, the three of them have stood around with their hands out. Fiona in particular. She was always coming up with some new harebrained scheme, her current business venture being one. Interior design? Who’s she trying to kid? She’s a Horton Ravine matron spending someone else’s money and suddenly, she’s talking about her talent and her ‘eye’ for design. She only has one client-some friend of hers named Dana...”“She’s married to one of Dow’s business associates?”“Joel Glazer, that’s right. How do you know him?”“I don’t. I know her, or I did back when she was married to someone else.”“She couldn’t be too bright. Fiona’s milking her for everything she’s worth.”“What about Dow’s daughters? What’s your relationship to them?”Crystal shrugged that one off. “They’re all right. They don’t know the half of what goes on. They probably hate me, but at least they’re too polite to say so. They’re usually busy sucking up to their dad. I’m sure they’re worried he’ll die and leave all his money to Griffith and me, which I can understand. I’d worry about the same thing if I were in their shoes.”She picked up a butter knife and cut into a wedge of Brie. She spread the soft cheese on a cracker, which she held out to me. I took it, watching while she made a second for herself, popped it in her mouth, and chewed. “Anyway, with Dow gone, it doesn’t seem important. Whatever quarrel I have with Fiona is immaterial.”“You have any idea where he is?”“I wish. That’s all I’ve really thought about for the past nine weeks.”“Do you believe he’s alive?”“No, not really, but I can’t be sure. If I knew he was dead, at least I could make my peace with it and get on with life.”“The police detective mentioned money missing. He says close to thirty thousand dollars had been pulled from his savings over a period of the past two years.”“So I heard. I didn’t know anything about that until they brought it to my attention. I know he kept a large sum of money somewhere, but he never said anything else about it. Apparently, the statements for that account were being forwarded to a post office box that I used to keep. Dowan asked about it a couple of months ago and I told him it’d been canceled. Now it looks like he was paying to keep it open all this time.”“I wonder why he asked you when he already had the answer.”Crystal shrugged. “Maybe he was wondering how much I knew.”“Why would he need that kind of cash?”“I have no idea. He used credit cards for everything.”“Could it be extortion?”“For what?”“That’s what I’m asking. Any ideas about that?”“You think he’s being blackmailed? That’s ridiculous. How so?”“Isn’t it possible?”She stared at me briefly and then shook her head, apparently drawing a blank. “You’d think a blackmailer would be interested in a lump sum, not a piddling three bills a week.”“Maybe it seemed more acceptable that way. It’s one thing to demand a large sum of cash. It’s something else again if someone asks for help making ends meet.”“I’m sure he’d have told me if someone were extorting money. Dow told me everything.”“As far as you know.”She blinked. “Well, yes.”“Besides, it might have involved you.”“In what way?”He might have paid the hush money in your behalf, as protection.” I don’t think so.” I could have sworn her cheeks tinted, but in the fading light it was difficult to tell. Her hand certainly didn’t tremble as she raised the glass to her lips. She set her wineglass on the deck and pressed her flattened hands between her knees as though to warm them.I changed tactics, not wanting her to disconnect from the conversation. “Would you be willing to go back and talk about what it’s been like for you the past nine weeks?”She let out a breath. “It’s been awful. Horrendous. At this point I’m numb, but the first two or three days, I was running on pure adrenaline and it really wore me down. The house was teeming with people-my friends, Dow’s daughters, his friends and colleagues. I didn’t want to see anyone, but I couldn’t refuse. I didn’t have enough energy to resist, so they swarmed right over me. I was barely holding on. All I wanted to do was sit and stare at the phone, pace to the door and back, scream, or get drunk. For days I’d get in the car and drive between the clinic and home, checking every possible route. I’d find myself on the road and then I’d realize how dumb it was. Dow could be anywhere and the chances of my spotting him were astronomically low.”“Was there anything unusual about the day he disappeared? Any behavior-anything he said-that seems different in retrospect?”Crystal shook her head. “It was like any other Friday. He was looking forward to the weekend. Saturday, he was playing in a tennis tournament at the country club. Nothing special, but he enjoyed it. Saturday we were going out to dinner with friends-this was a couple who’d recently moved here from Colorado, where they owned some restaurants.”“Can you give me those names?”“Sure. I’ll give you a list before you leave.”“No one else reported anything unusual?”“Not as far as I know. You can talk to his colleagues and the nursing home staff. I’ve spoken to most of them myself and asked the same question. The police have done informal interviews as well. People have tried to be helpful, but no one seems to know anything, or if they do, they haven’t said.”“Was he having problems at work?”“There are always problems at work. Dow takes his job very seriously. He’s involved with patients and staff, management issues. He also handles all the hiring and firing and the annual salary reviews. There’s always something going on. It’s just the nature of the beast. Recently, he’s spent a lot of time going over the books. The fiscal year at the clinic ends November 30 and Dow likes to be on top of it.”“I take it most of his time is devoted to the clinic?”“That’s right. He retired from private practice about five years ago. Aside from a few charities still dear to his heart, he spends his time at Pacific Meadows, keeping that up and running.”“Were-are-his responsibilities medical or administrative?”“I guess I’d say both. He’s very involved with the residents-not treating them, of course, they have their own personal physicians for their medical needs, but Dow’s there every day keeping an eye on things. I have to tell you, it’s not always easy. When your specialty’s geriatrics, you’re going to lose the very people you’ve grown most attached to.”“Anyone in particular?”“Well, no. I wasn’t speaking of anyone specific,” she said, “and I’m not saying he couldn’t cope. Of course he could. He’s been working with the elderly for many years. I’m just saying it took a toll on him emotionally.”“Is it possible he walked off?”“No.”“You’re sure of that?”“Absolutely. And you want to know why? Because of Griff. That boy is the light of Dowan’s eyes. If Dow got home late, he went to Griff’s room first. He’d lie down on the bed with him and just watch him breathe. Sometimes I’d find him fast asleep in there. He’d never leave Griffith voluntarily.”“I understand,” I said. There’s something else as well. Dow’s writing a book. This is a project he’s been wanting to do for years. He’s seen so many changes in medicine. He really has wonderful stories to tell. He wouldn’t abandon that.”“What about the two of you? Are you doing okay?”“We’re very close. In fact, we’ve been talking about another baby now that Griffith is two.”“So you’re convinced something’s wrong.”“Very wrong. I just can’t think what. If he’d been injured or abducted, surely we’d have heard by now.”“What about his employers? What can you tell me about them?”“I really don’t know much. I’ve only met Joel Glazer twice and one of those occasions was the groundbreaking for the new Pacific Meadows annex, and we didn’t have time to chat. As I understand it, Joel and Harvey Broadus made a fortune in construction, developing retirement communities in the Southwest. They also own a chain of board-and-care homes, plus a number of nursing facilities across the state. We used to see Harvey occasionally at social events, but he’s apparently in the middle of a nasty divorce so he’s keeping a low profile. He’s a bit phony for my taste, but maybe that’s just me. Anyway, after Dow retired in 1981, he found himself at loose ends. Everyone knows how highly regarded he is in the medical community. They approached him with regard to Pacific Meadows and asked him to take over the administrative work.”“And they all get along?”“As far as I know. I mean, they hardly ever see each other. Joel and Harvey seem to be happy with Dow, so they tend to go their way and let him go his. An operating company does the billing. I know at first he was worried they’d interfere with the running of the place, but it hasn’t turned out that way.”“How long have they owned the place?”“I believe they bought it in 1980. It’s over on Dave Levine Street right there at the corner of Nedra Lane. You’ve probably passed it a hundred times. Looks like Tara without the acreage-big white columns across the front.”“Oh, that. I see it on the right side any time I drive in from that end of town. There must be five or six nursing homes along that stretch.”“The staff people all refer to it as ‘Formaldehyde Alley,’ no disrespect intended. Dow hates when I repeat that.”“How did you two meet?”“Mom...”Crystal glanced into the great room through the open door. “We’re out here.” She must have caught sight of Leila because she turned back with an expression of annoyance and disbelief. “Oh, for heaven’s sake.”I followed her gaze.Leila was clumping down the stairs in a pair of black satin pumps with heels so high she could hardly stand erect. Now and then her ankles wobbled as though she were setting off across the ice for the first time on skates. Under her black leather jacket, her top was a see-through confection of chiffon and lace, worn with a long, narrow wool skirt. At fourteen, she was still in that coltish stage of development: no bust to speak of, narrow hips, and long, bony legs. The length of her skirt couldn’t have been less flattering. She looked like the cardboard cylinder in a spent roll of paper towels. She’d also done something strange to her hair, which was cut short, dyed a white blond, sticking out in all directions. Some strands had been dreadlocked while the rest remained as wispy as cotton candy. She came to the open door and stood there staring at us.Crystal snorted. “What’s that getup supposed to be?”“It’s not a ‘getup.’ What’s wrong with it?”“You look ridiculous. That’s what.”You do, too. You look like a bag lady. That sweater’s down to your knees.”Fortunately, I’m not going out in public. Now please go upstairs and find something decent to wear.”“God, you are always so worried what other people think.”“Knock it off. I’m really tired of fighting with you.”“Then why don’t you leave me alone? I can dress any way I want.It’s no reflection on you.”“Leila, you’re not leaving the house dressed like that.”“Great. I won’t go then. Thanks a lot and fuck you.”“Where’s your suitcase?” Crystal said patiently, declining Leila’s invitation to escalate.“I don’t have one. I told you I’m not going. I’d rather stay here.”“You didn’t see him last time and I swore you’d be there.”“I don’t have to go if I don’t want to. It’s my decision.”“No, it’s not, it’s mine, so quit arguing.”“Why?”“Leila, I’m irritated at all the lip you’ve been giving me. What’s the matter with you?”“I just don’t want to go. It’s boring. All we do is sit around and watch videos.”“That’s what you do here!”“You promised I could see Paulie.”“I never said any such thing. And don’t change the subject. Paulie’s got nothing to do with it. Lloyd’s your father.”“He is not! We’re not even related. He’s one of your stupid old ex-husbands.”“One ex-husband. I’ve only been married once before,” she said. “Why are you being so hostile and obnoxious? Lloyd adores you.”“So what?”“Leila, I’m warning you.”“If he’s so full of adoration why does he force me to spend time with him against my will?”“He’s not forcing you. I am and that’s final. Now get.”“I will if I can see Paulie.”“Absolutely not.”“God, you’re so mean. You don’t give a shit about me.”“That’s right. I’m just here to abuse and mistreat you. Call Children’s Protective Services.”“You think Lloyd’s so great, why don’t you go see him yourself?” Crystal closed her eyes, trying to control her temper. “We’re not going to do this in front of company. He’s got joint custody, okay? He’s picking you up at seven, which means he’s already on his way over. I’ll come get you Sunday morning at ten. Now go back up and change. And you better pack a bag or I’ll do it myself and you’ll hate what I choose.”Leila’s face shut down and I could see a patch of red form around her nose and mouth where she held back tears. “You are so unfair,” she said, and clomped back up the stairs again. She slammed the door behind her after entering her room, then screamed the word “bitch” again from the far side of the door.Crystal returned to our conversation, making no reference to Leila beyond a shake of her head and a rolling of her eyes. “Dow and I met in Vegas at the home of mutual friends. The first time I saw him, I knew I’d marry him one day.”“Wasn’t he married?”“Well, yes. I mean, technically speaking, but not happily,” she said, as though Dow’s marital angst justified her poaching on Fiona’s turf. “You’ve met Fiona. She’s only six months younger than him, but she looks like she’s a hundred. She drinks. She smokes two packs a day. She’s also hooked on Valium, which I doubt she mentioned when she was hiring you. Dow was sixty-nine last spring, but you’d never guess by looking. Have you seen a picture of him?”“There was one in the paper.”“Oh, that was terrible. I have a better one. Hang on.” She left the deck and moved into the great room, returning moments later with a framed color photo. She sat down on her chair again and passed the photograph to me. I studied Dow Purcell’s face. The picture, taken on the golf course, had been cropped so that the others in his foursome were scarcely visible. His hair was white, trimmed close, and his face was lean. He looked tanned and fit, wearing a white golf shirt, pale chinos, and a leather golf glove on his right hand. I couldn’t see the head of the club he was holding upright in front of him. “Where was this taken?”“Las Vegas. The same trip. That was in the fall of 1982. We were married a year later when his final divorce papers came through.”I handed the photo back. “Does he gamble?”She held the framed photograph and studied it herself. “Not him. He was speaking at a symposium on geriatric medicine. He loved Vegas for the golf, which he played all year long. He was a five handicap, really very good.”I wondered at the sudden use of the past tense but decided not to call attention to the shift. “Do you play?”“Some, but I’m terrible. I play to keep him company when he’s got no one else. It’s nice when we travel because it gives us something to do.” She leaned forward and set the picture on the table, studying it briefly before she turned back to me. “What happens now?”“I’ll talk to anyone who seems relevant and try to figure out what’s going on.”“There’s your mommy,” a man said. He stood just inside the door, holding Griffith, who was dressed for bed in flannel jammies with enclosed rubber-soled feet and a diaper tailgate in back. His face was a perfect oval, his cheeks fat, his mouth a small pink bud. His fair hair was still damp, sharply parted on one side and combed away from his face. Blond curls were already forming where a few strands had dried. Mutely, he held his arms out and Crystal reached for him. She fit him along her hip, looking at him closely while she spoke in a high-pitched voice, “Griffie, this is Kinsey. Can you say ‘Hi’?” This elicited no response from the child.She took one of his hands and waved it in my direction, saying, “Hewwoh. I weady to doh feepy. I dotta doh beddy-bye now. Nighitie-night.”“Night-night, Griffith,” I said, voice high, trying to get into the spirit of the thing. This was worse than talking to a dog because at least there you really didn’t anticipate a high-pitched voice in response. I wondered if we were going to conduct the rest of the conversation talking like Elmer Fudd.I glanced at Rand. “Hi. You’re Rand? Kinsey Millhone.”“Oh, I’m sorry. I should have introduced you.”Rand said, “Nice to meet you.” He appeared to be in his early forties, dark-haired, very thin, jeans, white T-shirt. I could still see damp splotches on his front from the toddler’s bath. Like Crystal, he was barefoot, apparently impervious to cold.I said, “I better go and let you get the little one to bed.”Rand took Griffith from his mother and retreated, chatting to the child as he went. I waited while she jotted down the names and phone numbers of her husband’s business associates and his best friend, Jacob Trigg. We exchanged parting remarks of no particular consequence, and I left with her assurance I could call if I needed to.On the way out, I passed Leila’s stepfather Lloyd, who’d just arrived. He drove an old white Chevy convertible with a shredded sun-faded top and patches of primer where various dents and dings were being prepped for repainting. His brush cut was boyish and he wore glasses with oversized lenses and tortoise-shell frames. He had the body of a runner or a cyclist-long, lean legs and no visible body fat. Even with a nip in the air, all he wore was a black tank top, shorts, and clunky running shoes without socks. I placed him in his late thirties, though it was hard to determine since I glanced at him only briefly as he passed. He nodded, murmuring a brief hello as he approached the front door. As I started my car, the first fat drops of rain were beginning to fall.
