---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "P Is for Peril - index_split_006.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - P Is for Peril"
tags: ["said", "like", "back", "one", "two", "tommy", "henry", "room", "could", "see", "william", "carpet", "lot", "door", "brother", "richard", "phone", "across", "paper", "white", "still", "way", "look", "guy", "right"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/PIsforPeril-indexsplit006html

---


"P" Is for Peril
Chapter 5Aside from Henry, Rosie’s tavern was empty when I arrived shortly after seven o’clock. I closed my umbrella and leaned it up against the wall near the door. The Happy Hour crowd had apparently been there and gone and the neighborhood drinkers hadn’t yet wandered in for their nightly quota. The cavernous room smelled of beef and wet wool. Several sections of newspaper formed a sodden door mat inside the entrance, and I could see where people had trampled their wet feet across the linoleum, tracking dirt and lines of newsprint. At one end of the bar the television set was on, but the sound had been muted. An old black-and-white movie flickered silently across the screen: a night scene, lashing rain. A 1940s coupe sped along a winding road. The woman’s hands were tense on the wheel. A long shot through the windshield revealed a hitchhiker waiting around the next curve, which didn’t bode well.Henry was sitting alone at a chrome-and-Formica table to the left of the door, his raincoat draped over the chair directly across from him, his umbrella forming a puddle of rainwater where it leaned against the table leg. He’d brought the brown paper bag in which Rosie had presented her sister’s medical bills. He had a glass of Jack Daniel’s at his elbow and a pair of half-rimmed glasses sitting low on his nose. An oversized accordion file rested on the chair next to him, the sections divided and labeled by the month. I watched him open a bill, check the date and heading, and then tuck it in the proper pocket before he went on to the next. I pulled up a chair. “You need help?”“Sure. Some of these go back two years if not more.”“Paid or unpaid?”“Haven’t figured that out yet. A little bit of both, I suspect. It’s a mess.”“I can’t believe you agreed to do this.”“It’s not so bad.”I shook my head at him, smiling slightly. He’s a dear and I knew he’d do the same for me if I needed help. We sat in companionable silence, opening and filing bills. I said, “Where’s Rosie all this time?”“In the kitchen making a calf s liver pudding with anchovy sauce.”“Sounds interesting.”Henry shot me a look.“Well, it might be,” I said. Rosie’s cooking was madcap Hungarian, the dishes impossible to pronounce and sometimes too peculiar to eat, her fowl soup with white raisins being a case in point. Given her overbearing nature, we usually order what she tells us and try to be cheerful about it.The kitchen door swung open and William emerged, dressed in a natty three-piece pin-striped suit, a copy of the evening paper tucked under his arm. Like Henry, he’s tall and long-limbed, with the same blazing blue eyes and a full head of white hair. The two looked enough alike to be identical twins on whom the years had made a few minor modifications. Henry’s face was narrower; William’s chin and forehead, more pronounced. When William reached the table, he asked permission to join us, and Henry gestured him into the remaining chair. “Evening, Kinsey. Hard at work, I see. Rosie’ll be out momentarily to take your supper order. You’re having calf’s liver pudding and kohlrabi.”“You’re really scaring me,” I said.William opened his paper, selected the second section, and flapped the first page over to the obituaries. Though his lifelong hypochondria had been mitigated by marriage, William still harbored a fascination for those people whose infirmities had ushered them out of the world. It annoyed him when an article gave no clue about the nature of the final illness. In moments of depression or insecurity, he reverted to his old ways, attending the funeral services of total strangers, inquiring discreetly of the other mourners as to cause of death. Key to his query was identifying early indications of the fatal illness-blurred vision, vertigo, shortness of breath-the very symptoms he was destined to experience within the coming week. He was never at ease until he’d solicited the true story. “Gastric disturbances,” he’d report to us later with a significant stare. “If the fellow’d only consulted medical authorities at the first hint of trouble, he might be with us today. His brother said so.”“We all have to die of something,” Henry invariably said.William would turn peevish. “Well, you don’t have to be such a pessimist. Vigilance is my point. Listening to the body’s messages-”“Mine says, You are going to die one day regardless so wise up, you old fart.”Tonight, Henry glanced at William’s paper politely. “Anyone we know?”William shook his head. “Couple of kids in their seventies; only one with a photo. Couldn’t have been taken much later than 1952.” He squinted at the page. “I hope we didn’t look that smarmy when we were young.”“You certainly did,” Henry said. He took a sip of whiskey. “If you go first, I know exactly the picture I’m going to give the paper for your obit. You in those knickers the summer we toured Atlantic City. Your hair’s parted down the center and it looks like you’re wearing lipstick.”William leaned closer. “He’s still jealous because I took Alice Van-dermeer away from him. She could jitterbug like the dickens and had money to burn.”Henry said, “She had a wen on her cheek the size and color of a small Concord grape. I never knew where to look so I palmed her off on him.”William turned several pages to the classified ads, where he compared descriptions of “found” dogs and cats with those reported missing, often spotting a match. While Henry and I continued to open and file Klotilde’s medical bills, William entertained us with all the livestock currently being offered for sale. He glanced up at me. “Well, here’s something. Still need office space? You should check this one out. Five hundred square feet, newly renovated, downtown. Two fifty a month, available immediately.”I stopped what I was doing and tilted my head in his direction. “You’re kidding. Let me see that.”William handed me the section, pointing to the item, which read:For lease: 500 sq ft in newly renovated Victorian, heart of downtown near courthouse; private bath and separate entrance w/private deck. $250/mo. Call Richard after 6:00 pm.The phone number was listed.I read the lines twice but they didn’t seem to change. “I’ll bet it’s a dump. They always embellish in these ads.”“It won’t hurt to call.”“You really think so?”“Of course.”“What if it’s rented?”“You won’t be out anything. Maybe the guy has others.” He reached into his watch pocket and removed a coin, which he placed on the table right in front of me. “Go on.”I took the coin and the paper and crossed the room. The pay phone was in the vestibule, the area dimly illuminated by a neon Budweiser sign. I dialed the number and read the ad again while I listened to four rings. Finally, the line was picked up on the other end and I asked to speak to Richard. “This is he.”I placed him in his thirties, though phone voices can be deceptive. “I’m calling with regard to the office space listed in tonight’s paper. Is the place still available?” I noticed a tinge of plaintiveness had crept into my voice.“Sure, but we’re asking for a year’s lease, first and last month’s rent, plus a cleaning deposit.”“Can I ask what street it’s on?”“Floresta. Across from the police station and about six doors down.”“And the price quoted is correct? The ad says two hundred and fifty bucks a month.”“It’s only one room. It’s got a closet and bathroom, but it’s not large.”I pictured a phone booth. “Would it be possible to see it tonight?”“As it happens, my brother’s in there laying carpet and I’m on my way over. You want to take a look, I can meet you there in fifteen minutes.”My watch said 7:30. “Great. I can do that. What’s the address?” He gave me the information. “You can pull on down the driveway to the parking lot in back. You’ll see lights on, first floor rear. My brother’s name is Tommy. The last name’s Hevener.”“I’m Kinsey Millhone. Thanks so much. I’ll see you in fifteen minutes.The building had clearly once been a single-family residence: a one-story white-frame cottage with gables in the roofline and a lot of gingerbread trim. At 7:42 I eased my VW down the driveway, my headlights cutting through the shadows. I slowed and peered out the driver’s-side window. The white paint looked fresh and there were flower beds along the side. How had I missed this? The location was ideal-one block away from the office I was now in-and the price couldn’t have been better. I counted ten parking spaces laid out along the narrow backyard, which was paved with asphalt and fenced on two sides. A black pickup truck was parked in one spot, but the rest were empty at this hour. There was a big trash bin just at the exit to the alleyway in back. Looking up, I could see Lonnie’s office windows and the back wall that framed the tiny lot behind his building. I parked and got out, trying to curb the sudden surge of hope. For all I knew, the property was on the market, or the lot was the site of a former gas station, the soil still contaminated by benzene and other carcinogens.A wide redwood deck had been constructed across the back of the building, complete with a long wooden ramp installed for easy wheel-chair access. A market umbrella with a big pale canvas shade stood open above a glass-topped table surrounded by four chairs. Several large terra-cotta pots had been planted with herbs. I was about to hyperventilate. First-floor lights were ablaze. I entered a small foyer. A door stood open to my immediate right. The scent of fresh paint was strong, overlaid by the staunch, secondary odor of brand-new carpet-ing. I closed my eyes while I offered up a quick prayer, repudiating my wickedness and promising to mend my evil ways. I opened my eyes and stepped through the doorway, absorbing the room at a glance.The room was twelve by twelve, with new hand-crank windows on two walls. There were two tiers of white-painted shutters in place of conventional drapes. On the far wall, two doors stood open, one leading to a small bathroom, the other into what was clearly a spacious walk-in closet. A red-headed fellow in jeans, an olive green T-shirt, and heavy work boots was sitting on the floor kicking a carpet stretcher, forcing the carpet taut along the baseboard. A phone line had been installed and the phone was currently resting on the surface of an empty cardboard box.The carpet itself was an industrial-grade nylon, a pattern of beige flecks against a charcoal gray background. I could see his carpet knife with its fat, curved blade, and the mallet he used to pound the carpet backing onto tack strips. Carpet scraps were piled up in the center of the room. An insulated plastic cooler was positioned near the wall beside a wastebasket that was filled to the brim with more carpet trimmings. The room seemed stuffy from the glaring two-hundred-watt bulb overhead.I said, “Hi, I’m Kinsey. Your brother said he’d meet me here at seven forty-five. Are you Tommy?”“That’s me. Richard’s always late. Written guarantee. I’m the good boy, the one who shows up when I’m expected. Hang on a minute. I’m almost done here.” He glanced over, flashing me a smile, all green eyes and white teeth. Deep creases formed a bracket around his mouth. With his red hair and his ruddy complexion, the effect was electric, like a black-and-white film with a wholly unexpected sequence in Technicolor. I felt myself averting my gaze with a little frisson that danced its way along my spine. I hoped I hadn’t inadvertently whimpered aloud.I watched him kick, pound, and cut, the muscles in his back and shoulders bunching as he worked. His arms were knotted with veins and matted with a fine red hair. A trickle of sweat angled down along his cheek. He shrugged, blotting the side of his face with the sleeve of his T-shirt. He tossed his mallet aside and sprung to his feet, wiping his palms on his back of his pants. He held a hand out, saying, “What’s your name again?”“It’s Kinsey. The last name’s Millhone with two L’s.”The sun had taken its toll on his fair complexion, leaving a series of lines in his forehead, additional lines at the outer corners of his eyes. I pegged him in his late twenties, five foot ten, a hundred and sixty pounds. Having been a cop, I still view men as suspects I might be called upon later to identify in a lineup. “Mind if I look around?”He shrugged. “Help yourself. There’s not much to see,” he said. “What kind of business you in?”I walked into the bathroom, my voice echoing against the tile. “I’m a private detective.”Toilet, pedestal sink with a built-in medicine cabinet above it. The shower stall was fiberglass with an aluminum-framed glass door. The floor was done in a white ceramic tile that ran halfway up the wall. Above, there was a floral-print vinyl paper in beige, white, and charcoal gray. The effect was both fresh and old-fashioned. Also, easy to keep clean.I moved back into the main room and crossed to the closet, peering into the four-by-six space, which was fully carpeted, empty, and painted a pristine white. Sufficient room for filing cabinets and office supplies. Even had a hook where I could hang my jacket. I turned back to the main room and let my gaze travel the perimeter. If I placed my desk facing the window, I could look out at the deck. The shutters were perfect. If a client dropped in, I could close the lower set for privacy and leave the upper set folded back for light. I tried a window crank, which turned smoothly, without so much as a whine or a creak. I leaned against the windowsill. “No termites, no leaky roof?”“No, ma’am. I can guarantee that because I did the work myself. This is real quiet back here. You ought to see it by day. Lot of light coming through these windows. Trouble walks in, you got cops right across the street.” His accent was faintly Southern.“Fortunately, my job’s not that dangerous.”He tucked his hands into his front pockets. His face was dappled with sun damage like a fine patina of freckles. I couldn’t think what to say next and the silence stretched. Tommy launched in again without a lot of help from yours truly. “Place was in pretty bad shape when we took possession. We upgraded plumbing and electrical, put on a new roof and aluminum siding. Stuff like that.” His voice was so soft I found myself straining to hear.“It looks nice. How long have you owned it?”“About a year. We’re new out here. We lost our parents a few years ago-both passed away. Richard hates talking about that almost more’n me. It’s still a sore subject. So, now it’s just the two of us, my brother and me.” He crossed to the cooler and opened the lid, glancing over at me. “Offer you a beer?”“Oh, no thanks. I was just about to have supper when someone showed me your ad. After I talk to Richard, I’ll head on back and eat there.”“Don’t like to drink and drive,” he remarked, smiling ruefully.“That’s part of it,” I said.He rooted through the crushed ice, pulled out a Diet Pepsi, and popped the tab. I held up a hand, but not quick enough to stop him.“Seriously, I’m fine.”His frown was softened by a tone of mock disapproval. “No beer, no soda pop. Can’s open now. Might as well have a sip. You don’t want the whole thing to go to waste,” he said. Again, he proffered the Pepsi, waggling the can coaxingly in my direction. I took it to avoid a fuss. He reached into the cooler and extracted a bottle of Bass Ale. He flipped the cap off and held it by the neck while he seated himself on the floor. He leaned his back against the wall, his legs extended in front of him. His work boots looked enormous. He gestured at the empty expanse of carpet. “Pull up a seat. Might as well be comfortable.”“Thanks.” I picked a spot across from him and sat down on the floor, taking a polite sip of Pepsi before I set the can aside.Tommy took a long draw of beer. He looked like a guy accustomed to smoking while he worked. “I used to smoke,” he said, as though reading my mind. “Tough to give up, but I think I got it licked. You smoke?”“Once upon a time.”“Been six months for me. Now and then, I still get the itch, but I take in a couple of breaths just like this....” He paused to demonstrate, his chest expanding as he sucked air audibly through his nose. He let out his breath. “Pretty soon the craving goes away. Where you from?”“I’m local. Went to Santa Teresa High.”“Me and my brother come from Texas. Little town called Hatchet. Ever hear of it?”I shook my head.“Right outside Houston. Pop was in oil. Luckily he sold the company before the bottom dropped out. Poured all his money into real estate. Developed shopping malls, office buildings, all kinds of commercial properties. California’s weird. People don’t seem all that friendly like they do where we come from. Especially the women. Lot of them seem stuck-up.”The silence settled again.He took another pull of beer and wiped his mouth on his palm. “Private detective. That’s a new one on me. You carry a gun?”“Occasionally. Not often.” I dislike being “drawn out,” though he was probably only being polite until his brother appeared.He smiled lazily as if picking up on my innate crankiness. “So which do you prefer? Guys way too young for you or guys way too old.”“I never thought about it like that.”He wagged a finger. “Guys way too old.”I felt my cheeks grow warm. Dietz really wasn’t that old.Me, I like women your age,” he said, showing a flash of white teeth. “You got a boyfriend?”“That’s none of your business.”Tommy laughed. “Oh, come on. You seeing someone steady?”More or less,” I said. I didn’t want to piss this guy off when I was hoping against hope I’d end up renting the place.“‘More or less.’ I like that. So which is it?”“‘More,’ I guess.”“Can’t be much of a romance if you have to guess.” He narrowed his eyes as though consulting his intuition. “So here’s what I think. I bet you’re real schizy. Bet you blow hot and cold about other human beings, especially men. Am I right?”“Not necessarily. I wouldn’t say that.”“But you must’ve seen a lot of bad guys, the business you’re in.”“I’ve seen some bad women, too.”“That’s another thing I like. Bad girls, bad women, renegades, rebels...” He lifted his head, checking his watch as he did. “Here he comes. Fifteen minutes late. You can just about bank on it.”I glanced at the window as a pair of headlights swept across the parking area. I rose to my feet. Tommy finished his beer and set the bottle aside. A car door slammed and shortly afterward Richard Hevener walked in, tapping a clipboard restlessly against the side of his leg. He wore jeans and a black T-shirt, over which he wore a supple-looking black leather sportscoat. He was taller than Tommy and a lot stockier, his hair dark. He was the somber brother and seemed to take himself very seriously. This was going to be a chore.“Richard Hevener,” he said as he offered me his hand. We shook hands and then he turned to Tommy. “Looks good.”“Thanks. Finish picking up and I’m out of here. You need anything else?”I tuned out briefly while the two conferred. I gathered there was another property undergoing renovations and Tommy was starting work on that the following week. His manner had shifted in his brother’s presence, his flirtatiousness gone. Their discussion finished, Tommy picked up the wastebasket full of carpet scraps and carried them outside, heading for the trash bin at the rear of the lot.“So what do you think of the place?” Richard said, turning to me. “You want to fill out an application?” His accent and his manner of speaking were much less “Texas” than Tommy’s. Consequently, he seemed older and more businesslike.“Sure, I could do that,” I said, trying not to sound like I was sucking up.He passed me the clipboard and a pen. “We pay water and trash. You pay your own electric and phone. Heating’s prorated and it varies, depending on the season. There’s only one other tenant and he’s a CPA.”“I can’t believe the space hasn’t been snapped up.”“Ad just went in. We’ve already had a lot of calls. Three, right after yours. I’m meeting another guy tonight.”I could feel anxiety begin to mount. I leaned on a windowsill and began to fill in the information. Applications are tedious, requiring tidbits of information that are actually nobody’s business. I filled in my Social Security number and my California driver’s license number, circled DIVORCED in the section that asked if I were single, married, or divorced. Previous addresses, how long, and reasons for leaving. Personal references I listed, along with the bank where I had my checking account. I made a few things up. I drew a dotted line where it asked for credit card numbers and the balance on those accounts. By the time I finished, Tommy had left. I heard his truck in the driveway and then it was gone. I handed Richard the clipboard, watching while he scanned the information.“If you want a deposit, I can give you one tonight.”“No need. I’ll call your references and run a credit check. We have a couple more people coming by on Monday.”“Do you have any idea how soon you’ll be making a decision?”“Middle of the week. Make sure we have a way to reach you in case I have a question.”I pointed to the application. “That’s my home phone and my work phone. I’ve got a message machine on both.”“This your current business address?”“That’s right. I’m renting space from an attorney named Lonnie Kingman. He and my landlord will both tell you I pay on time.”“Sounds good. Something comes up, I’ll call. Otherwise, I’ll be in touch once I’ve processed all the applications.”“Fine. That sounds great. If you like, I can pay the first six months in advance.” I was starting to sound ridiculous, fawning and insecure.Richard said, “Really.” He studied me, his eyes a dark, brooding brown. “Fifteen hundred dollars, plus the additional one seventy-five for the cleaning deposit,” he said, making sure I knew the full extent of my folly.I thought about Fiona’s check for fifteen hundred bucks. “Sure, no problem. I could give you that right now.”“I’ll take that into consideration,” he said.
