---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "P Is for Peril - index_split_008.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - P Is for Peril"
tags: ["could", "like", "said", "blanche", "see", "office", "fiona", "know", "hour", "two", "dollar", "make", "way", "small", "time", "might", "mother", "josh", "chair", "head", "would", "even", "second", "want", "well"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/PIsforPeril-indexsplit008html

---


"P" Is for Peril
Chapter 7After I left Pacific Meadows, I stopped by Kingman and Ives and let myself in the side door. I went into my office and peeled off my slicker, which I hung on my coat tree. Happily for me, the place felt deserted despite the fact there were lights on in most of the offices. The Saturday-morning cleaning crew had come and gone. Wastebaskets had been emptied. The air was scented with Pledge, and I could see rows of fresh vacuum cleaner tracks on the burnt-orange carpeting. The quiet was divine. Briefly, I conjured up an image of the new one-person office on Floresta Street. I was already feeling competitive with the other Prospective tenants.I pulled out my portable Smith-Corona and placed it on my desk. I sat down in my swivel chair and took out the file I’d opened. I sorted through the notes I’d assembled, adding the information on the index cards. Looming large in my mind was Fiona’s return on Tuesday. I could already see her, arms crossed, one foot tapping with impatience while I brought her up to date. She’d have dollar signs dancing like sugarplums above her head, thinking, Fifty bucks an hour for this? My strategy was to outfox the woman by presenting a beautifully constructed, typewritten report that would make it look like I’d done a lot more than drive around chatting with folks. What I labored under was the burdensome sense of Fiona’s disapproval, knowing she begrudged me every nickel I spent. Even if her original display of irritation had been pure manipulation, I could feel the sting of her whip on my neck. I tried not to dwell on the notion that I should have declined the job when I had the chance.I focused my attention on the business at hand. It took me an hour to sketch out a rough draft. I typed it and did some editing, revising it twice. I kept my language neutral, being careful to avoid drawing conclusions from what I’d learned so far. I also omitted much of what Crystal had said. I was being paid to find Dow, not to tattle to Fiona on his second wife. When I was satisfied the document was as polished as I could make it, I typed the new draft. Then I got out my calculator and added up my hours. How long had I spent with Detective Odessa? I tapped with my pencil on my front teeth. Really it was twenty minutes max, which I rounded out to half an hour. Didn’t want Fiona thinking I’d short-changed her with the cops. Let’s see. I’d spent almost two hours with Crystal and I added another hour to cover my morning visit to Pacific Meadows. I eyeballed the numbers. So far, I’d only earned $175 out of the $1,500 she’d paid me up front, which meant I still owed her $1,325 worth of my life. At this rate, I’d never be out from under. Oh well. I typed the invoice and attached it to the original of my report, then placed the copies in the folder.I stood up and stretched, working the kinks out of my neck with a head roll or two. Feeling restless, I wandered down the inner corridor, peering into offices along the way. As I passed Lonnie’s office, I was startled to catch sight of him. He sat tilted back in his swivel chair, his feet propped up on the edge of his desk, a transcript in his lap, apparently catching up on work while the office was quiet and the phones were silent. In lieu of the usual dress shirt and suit, he wore a plaid flannel shirt and a pair of stone-washed jeans. His concentration was complete, a focus that caused his whole body to become still. I watched him reach for his pencil and underline a phrase, soft scratching in the quiet.Lonnie looks like a boxer, his body dense and muscular, his nose thickened by scars. His hair is dark and unruly, growing in all directions. I’ve seen newborns like that, with a head of hair so thick and unexpected it seems comical. He’s a man of high energy, generally souped up on vitamins, coffee, nutritional supplements, and competitive drive. This was probably as relaxed as I’d ever seen him.“Lonnie?”He glanced up and smiled, tossing his pencil aside. “Kinsey. Come on in. I’ve been wondering what you were up to. I haven’t seen you for weeks.”“Not much. I didn’t even know you were here. The place has been so quiet, I thought I was alone. Catching up on work?”“Sure, but it’s just an excuse. Marie’s out of town. Some convention of butt-kickers down in San Diego. Tell you the truth, I’d rather be here than stuck by myself at home. Have a seat,” he said. “What about you? What brings you in on a Saturday afternoon?”“I was typing up some notes while things were fresh on my mind. Oh hey, before I forget. A guy named Richard Hevener may be calling to check my references.”“What’s the deal?”I think I found office space, but I’m waiting to see.” I filled him in on the situation, describing the newly renovated cottage with its redwood deck. “It’s great. Small and quiet and the location’s perfect.”“If he calls, I promise I’ll sing your praises. I won’t say a word about the tiny bit of time you spent incarcerated. Meantime, the door’s al-open if it doesn’t work out.”“I appreciate that. Cross your fingers for me.”“Not a problem,” he said. “Ida Ruth tells me you’re working on Dr. Purcell’s disappearance.”“How’d she hear that? I only took the job yesterday.” Lonnie waved a hand in the air. “Ida Ruth knows everything. She makes a point of it. Actually, she has a friend who used to work for him. Current speculation has it he’s run away from home. Days when I think about doing that myself.”“Oh, please. Marie would come after you and hunt you down like a dog.” His wife was a martial arts instructor, an expert in ways to cripple people with her size-five bare feet.“There is that. Of course, the problem with disappearing is you can’t do it on impulse. Not if you’re serious. Takes long-term planning if you want to stay gone for good.”“So you’d think. Personally, I suspect he’s dead, but his passport and thirty thousand dollars disappeared at about the same time.”“Thirty thousand dollars would evaporate in six months. Purcell’s accustomed to living well. He’s not going to pinch pennies. At his age?He’d have to be nuts.”“That was my reaction. On the other hand, if he settled in a Third World country, he could live pretty well on it, and if he ran short of funds, he could probably set up a small practice with no questions asked.”“Why not just stay where he is?”“Ah. I forgot to tell you the wrinkle I came across today.” I filled him in on my visit to Pacific Meadows and the chat I’d had with Merry, the Patron Saint of Loose Lips. “According to her, the federal fraud busters are hot on his trail. Half a million dollars in bogus claims. Guilty or innocent, he might have taken off once he realized they were closing in.”Lonnie winced with impatience. “Get serious. No way. The feds aren’t gonna put a guy like him in jail. The prosecutor has to prove criminal intent and how’s he going to do that? Believe me, Medicare regulations would drive any honest man insane. So you weasel the deal; claim coding errors and incompetent clerical help. They might fine him and wag a finger, but any good attorney could get him off. Hell, I could do it myself and I don’t know beans about that stuff. First thing you do is bore the hell out of the jury. Put up a bunch of charts and graphs, citing statistics ‘til nine out of the twelve start nodding off. Suggest the old doc’s gone senile or he’s a poor businessman.” He paused with a snort of amusement. “You hear about that case? Some guy up in Fresno got acquitted because a jury decided he was too dumb to be guilty of embezzlement. His own attorney painted him as such a buffoon, the jury took pity and cut the poor dunce loose. Purcell’s in no danger.”“Yeah, but did he know that? And what about the public disgrace?”“Nobody cares about those things in this day and age.” Lonnie picked up his pencil and drew a box on his legal pad. “One thing you’re forgetting. If the guy’s smart... say he’s ripped off the system to the tune of half a million bucks, which is probably conservative. All they know about so far. Call it two million dollars just to make it worth the risk. A smart guy makes two, maybe three trips abroad. Picks a country where he knows he can count on extradition laws if the feds track him down. He sets up a bank account and feeds money in, transferring funds until he has what he needs. Then he can go on merrily cheating ‘til someone’s onto him. Situation heats up, he’s on the first plane out. In that case, the thirty thousand dollars is just his travel fund.”I thought about Fiona’s story of Dowan’s vanishing twice without explanation. “Good point.” I was also thinking about the bookkeeper, who got fired, and the assistant administrator, who quit her job in protest. Maybe that was Dow’s attempt to point a finger elsewhere. The phone rang and Lonnie picked up the handset. From the nature of his comments, it was Marie checking in. I waved at him and eased out of his office, leaving him to finish his conversation in private, I returned to my office and reread my report. It seemed okay, but I thought I’d let it sit for a day. I’d be adding interviews once I figured out who I’d be talking to next. I drew up a list from the possibilities I’d gleaned. Purcell’s business associates were among the top five names, along with Dow’s best friend. I made sure I had the necessary phone numbers and then decided I’d done enough and it was time to go home.At two o’clock, I made myself some milk of tomato soup and a gooey grilled cheese sandwich that I dipped in my bowl and lifted dripping to my lips. The liquid red of the soup against the crunchy golden surface of the bread was a culinary portrait of early childhood consolation. Aunt Gin first served me this confection when I was five years old, mourning my parents who’d been killed in a car wreck the previous May. The ooze of melted Velveeta will always prompt the curious sensation of sorrow and satisfaction comingling on the surface of my tongue. This sandwich, I confess, was the highlight of my weekend, which is what life boils down to when you’re celibate.Afterward, I did what any other trained professional investigator would do: I walked the six steps into the living room, flipped off my shoes, and settled on the sofa, where I covered myself in a big puffy comforter and started reading a book. Within minutes, I’d been sucked through a wormhole into a fictional world, traveling faster than the speed of words into a realm without sound and without gravity.The phone rang, the sound annoyingly shrill. I’d sunk like a stone into a river of dreams and I was disoriented by the need to surface. I reached back, fumbling for the phone, which was resting on the end table above my head. I hadn’t even realized I’d fallen asleep, except for the drooling, which I don’t ordinarily do when awake. “Ms. Millhone?”“Yes.” If this was someone selling something I was going to say a very bad word.“This is Blanche McKee.”Three seconds passed. The name meant nothing. I rubbed my face and said, “Who?”“Fiona Purcell’s daughter. I understand Mother’s hired you. I just wanted you to know how relieved we all are. We’ve been urging her to do this ever since Daddy disappeared.”“Oh, right. Sorry. I couldn’t place the name. How’re you?” Groggily, I sat up, pulling the quilt around me like a tribal robe.“Fine, thanks. I hope I’m not calling at a bad time. I didn’t wake you, did I?”“Not at all,” I said. The truth is, everyone knows you’ve been sleeping regardless of how earnestly you might lie to them.Blanche must have decided to take me at my word. “I’m not sure how much Mother’s told you-quite a lot, I’m sure-but if there’s anything I can do, I’ll be happy to help. Did she mention my friend Nancy?”“I don’t believe so. The name doesn’t sound familiar.”“I was afraid of that. Mother tends to be a cynic, which you might have guessed. Nancy’s recently moved to Chico, but she’s available for consultation anytime by phone.”“Nancy. Good news. I’m making a note.” Whoever Nancy was.“I’m assuming you’ll want my personal impressions as well.”“Sure. I mean, eventually. That’d be great.”“I’m so happy you said that because I was thinking-if you have a minute this afternoon, you might want us to get together so I can share my concerns.”I hesitated. “Ah. Well. You know, at the moment, I’m more interested in facts than impressions and concerns. No offense.”“None taken. I didn’t mean to imply that I don’t have facts.”“Uh-huh.” I hadn’t forgotten Fiona’s barely disguised contempt for her younger daughter, mother of four, soon to be mother of five. On the other hand, maybe Fiona’d told Blanche about me in order to test my perseverance, since I’d made such a point of it during our meeting. Blanche said, “What time would suit?”I went ahead and mouthed the bad word, adding another choice expletive from my extensive collection. “Hang on a second. I’ll check my schedule.” I held the receiver to my chest while I looked at my watch. 4:06. I allowed time to pass while I pretended to scan my day planner with its numerous Saturday-afternoon appointments. I had no particular desire to meet Blanche, especially at the cost of a first-class nap. I hated the idea of abandoning my lair and I certainly didn’t want to traipse all over town on such a cold, damp day. My living room windows were already gray with the premature November twilight and I could see the drizzle slant against the bare branches that were tapping at the panes. I glanced at my watch again. 4:07.I could hear Blanche breathing and when she spoke, her tone was sharp. “Kinsey, are you there?”“I’m here. Gee, it looks like I’m Looked up today. Tomorrow might be possible. I could be there by ten o’clock.”“That won’t work for me and Monday’s out of the question. Isn’t there any way you could stop by? I feel it’s terribly important.”What I personally felt was a surge of irritation. I could just see Fiona returning from San Francisco, carping because I hadn’t taken time to interview Blanche. Fifteen hundred dollars and you couldn’t even bother to see my daughter? I said, “I could be there by five-thirty, but only for half an hour. That’s the best I can do.”“Perfect. That’s fine. We’re up on Edenside at the corner of Monterey Terrace. The number’s 1236. It’s a two-story Spanish. You’ll see a dark blue station wagon parked in the drive.”Edenside Road was part of a small housing development cunningly tucked into the foothills; five winding streets, each of which ended in a wide cul-de-sac. The builder had followed the terrain, taking the path of least resistance, the five streets built into the contours of the hill like rivulets of asphalt flowing from the highest point. My progress was halting, an exasperating ten miles an hour, as I slowed for a speed bump every fifteen yards or so. The neighborhood was ideal for children, whose presence was announced by the number of strollers, playhouses, swing sets, bicycles, tricycles, Big Wheels, and skateboards littering the yards. It looked like a Toys “R” Us had exploded close by. The house at the corner of Edenside and Monterey Terrace was indeed a two-story Spanish hacienda with a courtyard in front. Even in the gathering dark, I couldn’t miss the three-car garage that jutted forward aggressively like a pugnacious jaw. As I watched, the low-voltage landscape lights came on, illuminating the front of the house. The exterior stucco was tinted a gaudy pink and the roof tiles, while clay, were a series of interlocking orange 5’s, clearly mass produced. The original clay tiles still gracing many older structures in town are now a dark faded red, mottled with lichen and shaped like a C where the worker once laid the soft clay across his thigh in forming it.As promised, there was a dark blue station wagon parked in the drive. I pulled in at the curb, got out, locked my car, and approached the house along a crushed granite walk. The surrounding landscape was drought-proofed; all gravel and concrete, scattered with assorted cacti and oversized succulents. I let myself in through a small iron gate and crossed the tile-paved courtyard. A mock Spanish fountain splashed water by way of a circulating pump.I rang the bell. I could hear shrieks, barking dogs, and the clattering of small feet as a pack of short folk battled for the honor of playing butler to me. As the door opened, a girl of perhaps five turned to sock the four-year-old boy-child behind her. Within seconds, fists were nailing, the children red-faced and tearful as they struggled for possession of the knob between shoves and kicks with brown hard-soled shoes. Meanwhile, two hyperactive Jack Russell terriers leaped up and down as though spring-loaded. The toddler bringing up the rear got knocked on his diaper and set up a howl. Another girl, her back turned, was walking down the hallway toward the rear of the house, bellowing, “Mom!! Mooommy! Heather’s socking Josh and the dogs just knocked Quentin on his bee-hind.”“Amanda, what did I tell you about whining? Josh can take care of himself. Now please mind your own business and quit tattling or you will drive me insane.”Sway-backed, Blanche lumbered into sight, the sphere of her belly so large it looked a rogue moon, held in orbit by unseen gravitational forces. Her maternity outfit was a pale gray washable silk, palazzo pants, a long tunic, with tricky buttons and flaps. I was guessing that when the babe came, she’d be able to plop a boob out and feed the little tyke on demand. She had long blond hair, the strands fine and glossy, reaching almost to her waist. Her porcelain complexion was tinted a pale peach. Blue eyes, high forehead, finely arched brows. She looked like a storyland princess from a book of Grimm’s fairy tales-except, great with child.She swooped down and gathered up the howling baby, whom she settled on her hip. She grabbed Heather by the arm, hauling her away from her brother and then giving her a push along the corridor. “You kids go out in the backyard. Amanda’s going to make you some peanut butter crackers. You can have a snack out there. Just don’t eat too many. We’re having supper in a bit. Now scoot. I mean it. Everybody go on outside.”“Mo-om, it’s dark.”“Well, turn the porch light on.”“But we want to watch cartoons!”“Too bad. You do what I say. And no running,” Blanche warned. Heather and Josh were already pounding down the hall, but they slowed to a power walk, knocking and bumping each other. The dogs followed, barking, while Amanda veered off into the kitchen to make peanut butter crackers without an audible complaint. Amanda, who couldn’t have been much more than seven years old, was already being cast in the role of secondary mom.While Blanche was issuing orders, she’d managed to jiggle the crying baby and his howls had subsided. She turned and labored toward the family room with me tagging along behind her as well as I could.There were toys everywhere. In order to avoid crushing plastic underfoot, I had to shuffle, making a path through the Legos strewn on the floor in front of me. A wooden gate had been secured across the stairs to the second floor and what I assumed was the basement door had a hook-and-eye closure to prevent kidlets from tumbling headlong into the yawning abyss. Ever the optimist, I said, “Your mother mentioned a nanny.”“She isn’t here on weekends and Andrew’s currently out of town.”“What sort of work does he do?”“He’s an attorney. Mergers and acquisitions. He’s in Chicago until Wednesday.”“When’s the new baby due?”“Technically, not for three weeks yet, but he’ll probably come early. All the other ones have.”In the family room, a toy chest stood open, its contents flung in every direction: dolls, teddy bears, a bright yellow school bus filled with brightly painted spool kids with round painted heads. There was a wooden bench and mallet for pounding wooden pegs, crayons, picture books, Tinkertoys, small metal cars, a wooden train. A playpen had been erected in the center of the room. I spotted a mechanical swing, a circular walker with surrounding rubber bumpers, a high chair, an infant seat, and a portable crib. Every wall socket in view had been blanked out by plastic inserts. There was nothing on any surface below see-level, every breakable object removed to a high shelf as though in preparation for a coming flood.From outside, I could hear a piercing shriek go up, this at a higher decibel level than the earlier shrieking in the hall. Amanda started screaming, “Mommy! Mom!! Heather pushed Josh off the jungle gym and he has blood coming out of his nose....”Blanche said, “Oh, lord. Here, take him.”Without pausing, she handed off the baby like a forward pass and waddled into the kitchen. Quentin was surprisingly heavy, his bones dense as stone. He watched his mother depart and then his eyes moved to mine. Though Quentin was as yet incapable of speech, I could see the concept “Monster” forming in his underdeveloped brain. The enormity of his plight began to dawn on him, and he pursed his small mouth in advance of a round of howls.I called, “Can I put him in his playpen?”“No. He hates that,” she yelled as she went out the backdoor. The screaming in the yard was taken up by a second child apparently vying for equal time. As if in response, Quentin’s mouth came open in a cry so deep-seated he made no sound at first. He curled his body inward while he gathered his strength. Without warning, he flung himself outward like a diver in the midst of a back flip. He might have torn himself entirely out of my grasp if I hadn’t grabbed him and swung him up from the floor. I said, “Wheel” as though the two of us were really having fun. The look on his face suggested otherwise.I tried jiggling him as she had, but that only made matters worse. Now I was not only a monster, but a Monster Baby Jiggler, intent on shaking him to death. I walked around in a circle, saying, “There, there, there.” The child was not soothed. Finally, in desperation, I lowered him into the playpen, forcing his stiff legs to bend until he was fully seated. I handed him two alphabet blocks and part of a half-eaten soda cracker. The howling ceased at once. He put the cracker in his mouth and banged the letter P against the plastic padding under him. I stood up, patting myself on the chest while I moved into the kitchen to see what was happening.Blanche was just banging through the backdoor with four-year-old Josh on her hip, his legs hanging way past her knees. I could see a lump on his forehead the size of an egg and copious blood on his upper lip. One-handed, she dampened a kitchen towel, opened the freezer, and took out some ice cubes, which she wrapped in the towel and pressed against his head. She carried him into the family room and sank into a chair. The minute she sat down, he worked his way through a flap in her tunic and began to nurse. Taken aback, I averted my eyes. I thought kids his age had been twelve-stepped out of that.She indicated a nearby chair, paying him not the slightest attention as he suckled her right breast.I glanced down at the chair and removed a half-consumed peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwich before I settled on the edge. Josh’s medical emergency apparently entitled all of the children to escape the chill and dark outside. The next thing I knew, a cartoon show blasted from the TV set. Heather and Amanda sat cross-legged on the floor, and Josh joined them moments later holding the towel-wrapped ice cubes to his head.I tried to concentrate on what Blanche was saying, but all I could think about was that even at my age, a tubal ligation probably wasn’t out of the question.
