---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "P Is for Peril - index_split_007.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - P Is for Peril"
tags: ["like", "said", "one", "see", "door", "could", "two", "know", "think", "purcell", "time", "place", "work", "still", "office", "look", "back", "around", "might", "card", "way", "thought", "good", "well", "never"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/PIsforPeril-indexsplit007html

---


"P" Is for Peril
Chapter 6Saturday, I opened my eyes automatically at 5:59 A.M. I stared up at the skylight, which was beaded with rain, the entire Plexiglas dome scattered with tiny pearls of light. The breeze coming in the bedroom window smelled of leaf mold, wet sidewalks, and the dripping eucalyptus trees that lined the street beyond. Actually, the scent of eucalyptus is almost indistinguishable from the odor of cat spray, but I didn’t want to think about that. I bunched the pillow under my head, secure in the knowledge that I didn’t have to crawl out of bed for my run. As dutiful as I am about exercise, there’s still nothing more delicious than the opportunity to sleep in. I burrowed under the covers, ignoring the world until 8:30, when I finally came up for air.Once I’d showered and dressed, I made myself a pot of coffee and owned a bowl of cereal while I read the morning paper. I changed my sheets, started a load of laundry, and generally picked up around the place. When I was a child, my aunt Gin insisted I clean my room on Saturdays before I went out to play. Since we lived in a trailer, the task didn’t amount to much, but the habit remains. I dusted, vacuumed, scrubbed toilet bowls-mindless activities that left me free to ruminate. I alternated fantasies, mentally rearranging furniture in my new office space and thinking about who to query next in my search for Purcell. With Fiona’s fifteen-hundred-dollar retainer now safely in my account, I felt obligated to work through the weekend. I resisted the temptation to theorize after only one day’s work, but if I’d been forced to place bets, I would have plunked down my money on the notion that Purcell was dead. From what I’d learned of him, I couldn’t see him taking off without a word to his wife and small son. That didn’t explain the missing passport and the missing thirty grand, but both might surface in due course. At this point, there was no reason to believe they were germane.At eleven o’clock, I hauled out the phone book and turned to the yellow pages, checking out the section that listed nursing homes. There were close to twenty by my count. Many boasted large boxed ads detailing the amenities: COMPREHENSIVE RECUPERATIVE LONG-TERM CARE... SPACIOUS ROOMS IN A TRANQUIL SETTING... ELEGANT DESIGN OF BUILDING AND INTERIOR... BEAUTIFUL NEW FACILITY WITH SECURE GARDEN COURTYARD.Some included cartoon maps with arrows pointing out their superior locales, as though it was preferable to decline in one of Santa Teresa’s better neighborhoods. Most facilities had names suggesting that the occupants pictured themselves any place but where they were: Cedar Creek Estates, Green Briar Villa, Horizon View, Rolling Hills, The Gardens. Surely, no one envisioned being frail and fearful, abandoned, incapacitated, lonely, ill, and incontinent in such poetic-sounding accommodations.Pacific Meadows, the nursing home that Dow Purcell managed, touted twenty-four-hour RN care and on-site chapel and pastoral services, which were bound to come in handy. It was also certified by Medicare and Medicaid, giving it a decided advantage over some of its private-pay competitors. I decided to make a visit to see the place myself. The regular staff probably wouldn’t be there on weekends, which might prove advantageous. Maybe all the prissy, officious sorts were home doing laundry just like I was.I tucked a fresh pack of index cards in my handbag, pulled on my boots, and found my yellow slicker and umbrella. I locked the door behind me and scurried through the puddles to my car parked at the curb. I slid in on the driver’s side, shivering involuntarily at the chill in the air. The rain had picked up from the early morning lull and now pounded on my car roof with the staccato rattle of falling nails. I fired up the engine and then hunched over the steering wheel, driving in slow motion while the windshield wipers gave the royal wave.When I pulled into the parking lot at Pacific Meadows, the sky was dark with clouds, and the lights in the windows made the place look cozy and warm. I chose a spot near the entrance, assigned to an employee whose name had been painted out; black on black and impossible to read. I shut down the engine and waited until the squall had passed before I emerged. Even then, I had to pick my way across the half-flooded tarmac to the relative dryness of the sheltered front entrance. I shook off my umbrella and gave my slicker a quick brush before I stepped through the door. Dripping raincoats and wide-brimmed water-repellent hats were hung on a row of pegs. I added my slicker to the mix and propped my umbrella in the corner while I took my bearings.Along the wide hallway ahead, I could see a row of six elderly people in wheelchairs arranged against the wall like drooping houseplants. Some were sound asleep and some simply stared at the floor in a sensory-deprivation daze. Two were strapped in, their posture eroded by osteoporosis, bones melting from within. One woman, very thin, with long, white limbs, swung a bony leg fretfully over the arm of the wheelchair, moving with agitation as though prompted by pain. I felt myself recoil as if I were at the scene of a four-car pileup.At the far end of the corridor, two women in green uniforms piled sheets on a laundry cart already heaped with soiled linens. The air smelled odd-not bad, but somehow alien-a blend of disassociated odors: canned green beans, adhesive tape, hot metal, rubbing alcohol, laundry soap. There was nothing offensive in any single element, but the combination seemed off, life’s perfume gone sour.To my right, aluminum walkers were bunched together like grocery carts outside a supermarket. The day’s menu was posted on the wall, behind glass, like a painting on exhibit. Saturday lunch consisted of a ground chicken patty, creamed corn, lettuce, tomato, fruit cup, and an oatmeal cookie. In my world, the lettuce and tomato might appear as a restaurant garnish, a decorative element to be ignored by the diner, left behind on the plate to be thrown in the trash. Here, the lettuce and tomato were given equal billing, as though part of a lavish nutritional feast. I thought about fries and a QP with Cheese and nearly fled the premises.French doors opened into the dining room, where I could see the residents at lunch. Even at a glance, I noted three times more women than men in evidence. Some wore street clothes, but the majority were still dressed in their robes and slippers, not bedridden but confined by their convalescent status. Many turned to stare at me, not rudely, but with a touching air of expectation. Had I come for a visit? Was I there to take them home? Was I someone’s long-overdue daughter or niece proposing an outing in the clean, fresh air? I found myself glancing away, embarrassed I was offering nothing in the way of personal contact. Sheepishly, I looked back, raised my hand, and waved. A tentative chorus of hands rose in response as my greeting was returned. Their smiles were so sweet and forgiving I felt pricked with gratitude.I backed away from the dining room and crossed the hall. A second set of doors stood open, revealing a day room, currently empty, furnished with mismatched couches, upholstered chairs, a piano, two television sets, and a cluster of game tables. The floors were done in a glossy beige linoleum, the walls painted a restful shade of robin’s egg blue. The ready-made drapes were a blend of yellow, blue, and green in a vaguely floral pattern. Countless throw pillows had been needle-pointed, cross-stitched, quilted, and crocheted. Perhaps a clutch of church ladies had been afflicted by a fit of stitchery. One pillow had a saying embroidered across the face-YOU’RE ONLY AS OLD AS YOU FEEL-a disheartening thought, given some of the residents I’d seen. Metal folding chairs were stacked against the near wall for quick assembling. Everything was clean, but the “decorating” was generic, budget-driven, falling somehow short of good taste.I walked past the front desk, which was located in a small alcove, and cruised down the corridor, guided by signs indicating the services of a dietary supervisor, a nursing supervisor, and a clutch of occupational, speech, and physical therapists. All three doors were open, but the offices were empty and the lights had been doused. Across the hallway I saw a sign for Admissions. That door was closed and a casual try of the knob told me it was locked. Next door was Medical Records, which apparently shared space with Administration. I thought I’d start there.The overhead lights were on and I moved through the door. There was no one in evidence. I waited at the counter, idly staring at the wire basket filled with incoming mail. Casually, I surveyed my surroundings. Two desks back-to-back, one with a computer, the other with an electric typewriter humming faintly. There were numerous rolling file carts, a copy machine, and metal file cabinets on the far wall. There was also a big clock with a clicking second hand I could hear from fifteen feet away. Still no one. I rested my elbow on the counter, dangling my fingers near the basket full of mail. By fanning the corners and tilt-ing my head, I could read most of the return addresses. Bills, the usual gas and electric, a lawn and gardening service, two manila envelopes from Santa Teresa Hospital, better known as St. Terry’s.“Can I help you?”Startled, I straightened up and said, “Hi. How’re you?” The young woman had emerged from the door connecting Administration to Medical Records. She wore glasses with red plastic frames. Her complexion was clear, but she looked like she’d suffer a contagion of zits at the least provocation. Her hair was a medium brown in several irregular lengths; a layered cut grown out now and badly in need of a trim. Under her green smock, she wore brown polyester pants. The name MERRY and PACIFIC MEADOWS were machine-embroidered on the breast pocket above her heart.She crossed to the counter, passing through a hinged door, and took her place on the far side. At first glance, I’d thought she was in her early thirties, but I quickly revised that downward by a good ten years. She wore metal braces on her teeth and whatever she’d eaten for lunch was still embedded in the wires. Her breath smelled of tension and discontent. Her expression remained quizzical, but her tone had an edge. “Can I ask what you were doing?”I blinked one eye in her direction. “I lost my contact lens. It might have popped out in the car. I only noticed it just now. I thought it might have fallen in the basket, but there’s no sign of it.”“Want me to help you look?”“Don’t worry about it. I have a whole box of ’em at home.”“Are you here to see someone?”“I’m here on business,” I said. I removed my wallet from my shoulder bag and flipped it open. I pointed at my P. I. license. “I’ve been hired to look into Dr. Purcell’s disappearance.”Merry squinted at my license, holding up the postage stamp-sized photo for comparison with my face-sized face. I said, “Are you the office manager?”She shook her head. “I’m temping here on weekends while the other girl’s out on maternity leave. Monday through Fridays, I’m Mrs. Stegler’s assistant.”“Really. That’s great. And what does that entail?”“You know, typing, filing. I answer phones and distribute mail to all the residents, whatever needs doing.”“Is Mrs. Stegler the one I should be talking to?”“I guess. She’s Acting Associate Administrator. Unfortunately, she won’t be back until Monday. Can you stop by then?”“What about Mr. Glazer or Mr. Broadus?”“They have an office downtown.”“Gee, that’s too bad. I was driving through the neighborhood and took a chance. Well. I guess it can’t be helped.”I saw her gaze stray to her computer. “Could you excuse me a minute?”“Go right ahead.”She moved around to her twelve-inch monitor with its amber print on black. She was probably using office hours to do her personal correspondence. She pressed keys until she’d backed out of the document. She returned to the counter, smiling self-consciously. “You have a business card? I can have Mrs. Stegler call you as soon as she gets in.”“That’d be great.” I took my time fumbling through my handbag to find a business card. “How long have you been here?”“Three months December 1. I’m still on probation.”I put my card on the counter. “You like the work?”“Sort of, but not really. You know, it’s boring, but okay. Mrs. S. has been here forever and she started out just like me. Not that I’ll stick around as long as she has. I’m two semesters short of my college degree.”“What field?”Elementary ed. My dad says you shouldn’t job-hop because it looks really bad on your resume’. Like you’re shiftless or something, which I’ve never been.”“Well yeah, but on the other hand, if you’re interested in teaching, there’s no point hanging on to a job that doesn’t suit.”“That’s what I said. Besides, Mrs. S. is real moody and gets on my nerves. One day she’s sweet, like butter wouldn’t melt in her mouth, and then she turns around and acts all crabby. I mean, what is her problem?”“What’s your guess?”“Beats me. They’re still looking for someone to fill the position, which gritches her but good. She thinks she should be promoted instead of just being used is how she put it.”“If she did get promoted, who would she replace?”“Mrs. Delacorte. She’s the one who got canned.” I kept my expression neutral. Not only was she bored, but she hadn’t learned the basic rules, the most compelling of which is never, never, never confide company secrets in the likes of me. I said, “Golly, that’s too bad. Why was she fired, has anybody said?” My lies and fake behavior are usually heralded by “Gollys” and “Gees.”“She wasn’t fired exactly. It’s more like she was laid off.”“Oh, right. And when was that?”“The same time as Mrs. Bart. She’s the bookkeeper since way back when. They were interviewing for her position the same time I applied for this one.”“How come?”“How come what?”“I wonder how the bookkeeper and the administrator got laid off at the same time. Was that coincidence?”“Not at all,” she said. “Mrs. Bart was let go and Mrs. Delacorte got upset and raised a stink. Mr. Harrington suggested she might be happier finding work somewhere else, so that’s what she did. This is all stuff I heard.” She stopped what she was saying and her eyes seemed to widen behind the red plastic frames. “You’re not taking notes. I’m not supposed to gossip. Mrs. S. is hell on that.”I held up my hands. “I’m just making conversation ‘til the rain lets up.”She patted her chest. “Whew! For a minute, I got nervous. I wouldn’t want you to get the wrong impression. I mean, it’s like I told her, I’d never blab anybody’s private business. It’s not in my nature.”“You and me both,” I said. “So who’s Mr. Harrington? I never heard of him.”“He works for the billing company in Santa Maria.”“And he’s the one who hired you?”“Kind of. He interviewed me by phone, but only after Mrs. S. had already approved my application. That’s the way it works around here. Make the guys think they’re in charge when we’re really the ones who do everything.”“I thought Dr. Purcell did all the hiring and firing.”“I don’t know anything about that. I was here less than two weeks when he, you know, ran off or whatever. I think that’s why Mr. Harrington was forced to step in.”“Where’s Mrs. Delacorte work now? Has anybody said?”“She’s over at St. Terry’s. I know because last week she stopped by to visit with Mrs. S. Turns out she found a great job so it’s worked out fine. Getting laid off can be a blessing, though it didn’t seem like it at the time is what she says.”“What about Mrs. Bart?”“I don’t know where she went.”“Did you know Dr. Purcell?”“I knew who he was, but that’s about it. That’s his office in there. He just like, you know, vanished. It really gives me the creeps.”“Weird. I wonder what went on.”“No telling. The whole staff’s upset. All the residents adored him. He made sure everybody got a card on their birthday and stuff like that. He paid out of his own pocket just so all these pitiful old people would feel special.”Has anyone made a guess about what happened to him?”“It’s all they talked about at first. I mean, not me so much because I hardly knew him.”“What kind of thing...”I could see Merry wrestle with her conscience, deliberating a good seven seconds before She-Who-Never-Blabs leaned toward me. “Promise you won’t repeat this....”“I won’t even say it once.”She lowered her voice. “Mrs. S. thinks he left the country.”I lowered my voice, too. “Because of...”“Medicare.”“Oh, that’s right. Someone mentioned that before, but I didn’t have a chance to ask. Meaning what?”She said, “F-R-A-U-D. Last winter, the OIG-”“OIG?”“Oh, that’s the Office of Inspector General. They’re part of the Department of Health and Human Services. Anyway, OIG faxed us this list of charts and billing records they wanted to see. Mrs. S. said at first Dr. Purcell didn’t think anything of it. They do that sometimes just to keep you on your toes. But then they came back and he figured out how serious it was. He kept going over the information to see how it’d look to them. Not good. Up to his lower lip in poop, to coin her phrase.”“Is that why he’d been working late the last couple of months?”“Well, yeah.”“So the place is under investigation?”“Big time. It started as a desk audit. They wanted a bunch of stuff covering the past two years. That’s when Dr. P. came in as the medical director. I mean, he’s that and administrator with a hyphen in between. The way Mrs. S. tells it, if Pacific Meadows loses its funding, the place’ll be shut down. Not to mention all the penalties-you know, fines and restitution. She says maybe even jail time, plus the public embarrassment. The Purcells are like this big-time la-di-dah social couple so you can imagine the disgrace. Dr. P. was the one lined up to take the brunt of it. Like his butt’s in a sling. Those are her words, not mine.”“What about his employers?”“Oh, the other two don’t have anything to do with the hands-on stuff. They’re all over the state, taking care of other business.”“Well, that sounds scary for Dr. Purcell,” I said.“I’d’ve died if it’d been me.”“I’ll bet,” I said. “When did this first come up?”“I think last January, way before my time. Then in March, these two guys from MFCU swooped in unannounced-that’s the Medicaid Fraud Control Unit. They came loaded with questions and a list of all the charts they wanted pulled. Everybody scrambled around, practically wetting their pants. Dr. P. was notified of this big list of violations and a lot of questionable claims, meaning P-H-O-N-Y. We’re talking thousands of dollars. Half a million at least and that’s just scratching the surface. He could turn out to be a major big-time crook.”“I’m surprised it didn’t hit the papers.”“Mrs. S. says they’ll keep a lid on it ‘til they see what they’ve got. Meantime, they’re breathing down his neck and they mean business.”“So she thinks he bolted to avoid punishment?”“Well, I sure would if I was in his place.”“How do you know it was him? Other people must’ve had access to billing records. Maybe that’s why the bookkeeper was laid off,” I said. She leaned forward and lowered her gaze. “You won’t mention this, you swear? Cross your heart.”I crossed my heart and held up my hand.“Mrs. Dorner-she’s director of Staff Development? She thinks Dr. P. could’ve been kidnapped. Snatched in the parking lot to keep him quiet.”I said, “Wow,” and made a skeptical face. “Unfortunately, the cops say there’s no real evidence of that.”“It wouldn’t take much. Slap tape on his mouth, throw him in the trunk, and take off,” she said. “They could have used his own car, which is why it hasn’t been found.”I saw Merry’s look as she began to busy herself, fussing with the mail “That’s a very good point.”I glanced over my shoulder. A nurse in a white uniform was standing in the doorway. She had fixed us with a look that was both shrewd and intimidating. I cleared my throat and said, “Well. Merry. I better scoot and let you get back to work. I’ll stop back on Monday and chat with Mrs. Stegler.”“I’ll tell her you were here.”The nurse turned and looked at me as I passed through the doorway within inches of her. I repressed the urge to shudder once my back was turned, wondering exactly how much she’d heard.At the entrance, I retrieved my slicker and took a moment to reassemble myself in rain garb. When I emerged from the nursing home, the rain had slowed to a drizzle and a mist seemed to float on the tarmac like smoke. The eaves still dripped water at irregular intervals. I bypassed a puddle and crossed the parking lot to the slot I’d taken. I could see now, with fresh eyes, that the name newly painted out at the foot of the parking space was P. DELACORTE.Once in my car, I opened the pack of index cards and started taking notes-one fact per card-until I’d emptied my brain. I couldn’t help wondering why Crystal and/or the cops hadn’t mentioned this fraud business when I’d talked to them.
