---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "P Is for Peril - index_split_009.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - P Is for Peril"
tags: ["could", "crystal", "said", "know", "like", "set", "well", "friend", "one", "blanche", "see", "daddy", "back", "joel", "left", "nancy", "time", "still", "way", "think", "office", "say", "room", "get", "fact"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/PIsforPeril-indexsplit009html

---


"P" Is for Peril
Chapter 8I glanced at my watch, a gesture that wasn’t lost on her.“I know you’re in a hurry so I’ll get to the point. Has Mother filled you in on Crystal’s past?”“I know she was a stripper before she married your dad.”“I’m not talking about that. Did she mentioned Crystal’s fourteen-year-old daughter was born out of wedlock?”I waited, wondering at the relevance. I leaned forward, not from avid interest, but because the whistles, bangs, and manic music from the television set were loud enough to cause permanent hearing loss. I watched Blanche’s lips move, putting the sentences together belatedly like the subtitles on a foreign film.“I’m not even sure Crystal knows who the father is. Then she married Lloyd somebody and had another child by him. That boy died when he was eighteen months old, an accidental drowning-this was four or five years ago.”I squinted. “And you think this is somehow connected to your father’s disappearance?”She seemed startled. “Well, no, but you said you wanted all the facts. I wanted to fill in the picture so you could see what you’re up against.”“Meaning what?” A commercial came on, the sound ratcheted up a notch so the little children who lived across the street wouldn’t miss the pitch for a vitamin-rich cereal that was supposed to look and taste like licorice.Blanche was saying, “Doesn’t Crystal’s behavior strike you as odd?”I was largely lip-reading by now and her comment had gone completely over my head. “Blanche, could we turn down the sound on the television set?”“Sorry.” She reached for the remote control and muted the sound. The silence was heaven. The children continued to sit on the floor, arranged in front of the set as though gathered around a campfire. Frantic images danced across the screen in colors so vivid they left an afterimage if I glanced away.Blanche returned to her commentary. “I don’t know about you, but Crystal doesn’t seem at all distraught about what’s happened. She’s cool as can be, which seems inappropriate to me.”“It has been nine weeks. I don’t think anyone can be distraught for that long. Defenses kick in. You manage to adjust or you go insane.”“I just think it’s interesting that Crystal’s never made a public appeal for information about Daddy. She’s never offered a reward. She’s never sent out any flyers. No psychics have been consulted....”That caught me up short. “You think a psychic would help?”“It wouldn’t hurt,” she said. “My friend Nancy’s uncanny. She has this amazing, quite incredible gift.”“She’s a psychic? Is that why she’s offering to consult with me on the phone?”“Of course. When I lost my diamond ring, she was able to pinpoint the exact location.”“How’d she do that? I’m really curious.”“It’s hard to describe. She said she smelled something sweet. She saw glimpses of white, maybe something nautical. She did two separate... readings, for lack of a better word... and the images were the same. Then I realized the last time I remembered seeing the ring, I’d taken it off to wash my hands at the bathroom sink. I’d already searched that area half a dozen times. As it turned out, I’d set the ring in the soap dish and it was embedded on the underside of the soap, which is exactly what she smelled.”I said, “What was the white part? Was that the bathroom sink?”“Not in that bathroom. The sink is hunter green in there, but the soap was white.”“Got it. What was the nautical part?”Blanche’s tone was defensive. “Not everything’s literal. Some of the images she sees are metaphorical... you know, associative.”“Nautical... faucet water,” I suggested gamely.“The point is, Nancy’s offered to consult with Crystal, but she refuses to cooperate.”“Maybe she doesn’t believe in psychics.”“But Nancy’s fabulous. I swear.”“How much does she charge?”“Oh, she doesn’t want money. Ordinarily, she does, but this is strictly out of friendship with me.”“Why does Crystal have to be involved? Can’t Nancy do a reading and simply tell you what she sees?”“She has to have access to the house so she can pick up on Daddy’s vibes, his psychic energy. I took her over to his office and let her sit in his chair. She keeps getting this picture of him approaching a house and going through the front door. Then nothing. This has to be Crystal’s beach property because she visualizes sand.”“Could be the desert.”Blanche blinked. “Well, I suppose it could.”“Anyway, go on. Sorry to interrupt.”“But that’s it. She sees a door and then blank. Without Crystal’s help, she can only go so far. We think he left the office and drove out to the beach house as usual, only something went terribly wrong. Of course, Crystal denies this. She claims he never arrived, but we only have her word for it.”“So you think she knows where he is and she’s covering?”“Well, yes,” she said, as though surprised I’d ask. “Nancy can feel his presence. She gets the strong impression he’s been hurt. He’s definitely surrounded by darkness. She says he’s trying to reach us, but something’s holding him back.”“He’s alive?”“She’s sure he’s alive. She’s very clear about that. However, she says there are some very negative forces at work. She says he’s distressed because he doesn’t know where he is. He’s encompassed by this oppressive spiritual consciousness. She can feel his confusion, but that’s as much as she gets. Nancy says Crystal’s very connected to Daddy’s plight. In fact, she probably caused it.”“How?”“Well, she could have knocked him out and driven him away somewhere.”“And done what with his car? I don’t mean to argue. I’m genuinely puzzled.”“There could have been two of ’em. She could have hired someone. How do I know? I’m just telling you... nothing would suit her better than to have him out of the way.”“Why? I mean, just for the sake of argument, let’s say she had him kidnapped and he’s being held against his will. What’s her motive? Can’t be money. There hasn’t been a ransom note and no contact from anyone offering to make a deal.”Blanche leaned forward. “Listen. Before she married my father, she signed a prenuptial agreement, according to which she gets absolutely nothing if they divorce.”“Wait a minute. Back up. You still haven’t told me how she intends to profit if she had him snatched.”“I didn’t say she had him kidnapped. I said she knows where he is.”“What’s that have to do with a pre-nup?”“She’s been having an affair.”“Your mother mentioned that as well. This is Glint Augustine?”“Exactly. Now she wants her freedom, but she wants the money, too. If she tries to divorce him, she’ll end up with nothing. The only way she benefits is if Daddy dies.”“Which, according to Nancy, he hasn’t done yet.”“That’s right.”“Why would she risk anything as blatant as an affair with her personal trainer? Wouldn’t word get out?”“He was her personal trainer; he’s not now. Once she started screwing him, I guess they decided to discontinue the public aspects of their relationship. The rumors started flying in any event.”.’,”. “How did you find out?”“From Mother’s friend, Dana Glazer. She and her husband have a house in Horton Ravine. Joel’s one of Daddy’s-”“Employers. Yes, I heard about that.”“The Glazer property backs right up to Daddy’s with just a little fence in between. They have a guest cottage back there, and Crystal asked if they’d consider renting it temporarily to a friend of hers. She claimed he’d bought a house he had to renovate and the work wouldn’t be finished until early fall. This was back in January. Anyway, the Glazers don’t use the cottage, so they decided, hey, why not? They asked eight hundred dollars a month, and the guy never batted an eye. Of course, once Dana realized what was going on, she was horrified. She found it thoroughly repulsive, which is why she hated having to tell my mom.”“Why’d she tell you?”“She didn’t. I heard it from another friend. Dana confirmed the story, but only because I pressed. Believe me, I don’t gossip.”“A lot of people don’t. It doesn’t seem to stop them from passing stuff on. Why didn’t Dana evict him if she found the situation so repellent?”“Because he signed a six-month lease. He’s gone now and good riddance. You’re welcome to talk to her if you don’t believe me. I mean, Dana ought to know. It happened right under her nose. Poor mother. She still thinks Daddy’s coming back to her. Bad enough he left her for such a... tart, but the fact that Crystal’s still doing it makes Daddy look like a fool.”“Which leads us to what conclusion?”“Crystal wants him dead. She wants him out of the way,” she said with the first flash of feeling I’d seen in her. Her mouth trembled and she began to blink rapidly. She looked off toward the hallway, taking a moment to compose herself. Under her maternity tunic, I saw a knot move across her lap, probably the baby’s foot. I could see why people reached out impulsively to lay a hand on such a belly. Blanche directed her comments to the far side of the room. “Believe me, she married Daddy for his money. The pre-nup was just a ploy. She might have meant it at the time, but then she ran into Clint and got involved with him. Like I said, if Daddy dies, she inherits the bulk of his estate and then she’s home free. If she divorces him, she gets nothing. It’s as simple as that.”“Blanche, you don’t know for a fact your father’s dead. None of us know that. Even your friend Nancy claims he’s still alive.”Blanche’s gaze swung back to mine, her blue eyes ablaze. “Don’t say ‘even Nancy’ like she’s a charlatan. I resent that.”“Not my intention. I withdraw the word. The point is, she has an image of him helpless, but alive, at least from what you say.”“But for how long? The man’s nearly seventy years old. What if he’s tied up, what if he’s gagged and can’t breathe?”“All right, all right. Let me see what I can do to check it out. So far, this is pure theory, but I can appreciate the worry.”The minute I got home, I went to my desk and began taking notes, writing down the list of possibilities for Dowan Purcell’s fate. I’d dismissed the notion that he’d been kidnapped, but maybe I was wrong. He might have been forcibly removed and carted off somewhere, in which case, he was either dead (sorry, Nance) or being held against his will. I detailed the other options, writing them down as quickly as they occurred to me. He could have left voluntarily, departing of his own accord, on the run or hiding out. He could have met with an accident while driving under the influence. If he were lying at the bottom of a canyon, it would certainly explain the fact that his Mercedes hadn’t been spotted yet. He could have been subject to any one of a number of fatal incidents: aneurysm, heart attack, stroke. If so, it was puzzling that no one had stumbled across the body, but it sometimes happens that way.Or what? He could have established a secret life, having slipped from one persona into the next. What else? Fearing disgrace, he could have killed himself. Or, as Blanche suggested, someone could have killed him for gain, or to cover something worse. I couldn’t think of any other permutations. Well, two. Amnesia, though that felt like an old ‘30s movie plot. Or he might have been assaulted by a mugger who overplayed his hand and then disposed of the body. The only other possibility was his having been arrested and jailed, but according to Detective Odessa, Purcell hadn’t shown up in any law enforcement computer system. From this, I surmised that he hadn’t been identified as the perpetrator of his own crimes or the victim of anyone else’s.I studied the list. There were certain variations I had no way to pursue. For instance, if Dow had been taken ill, if he’d been injured or killed in a fatal accident, I had no way to know unless someone stepped forward with information. The cops had already canvassed hospitals in the area. This was one of those times when being a smalltown private investigator (and a lone operator on top of that) made the job difficult. I had no access to airline, immigration, or customs records, so I couldn’t determine if Purcell had boarded a plane (or a train or a boat) in his name or someone else’s (using a fake driver’s license and a fake passport). If he were still in this country, he might well evade notice as long as he didn’t use his credit cards, didn’t rent or buy property, didn’t apply for a telephone or utilities, didn’t drive with expired tags, or in any other way attract attention to himself or his vehicle. He couldn’t vote, couldn’t do work that required his true Social Security number, couldn’t open a bank account. He certainly couldn’t practice medicine, which is how he’d earned a living for the past forty years.Of course, if he’d cooked up a false identity, he could do as he pleased as long as his story was plausible and his bona fides checked out. If this were the case, finding him would be next to impossible after only nine weeks. There simply hadn’t been enough time for his name to surface in the records. My only hope was to plod my way systematically from friend to friend, colleague to associate, current wife to ex, daughter to daughter, in hopes of a lead. All I needed was one tiny snag in the fabric of his life, one loop or tear that I might use to unravel his current whereabouts. I decided to focus on the areas over which I had control.Sunday went by in a blur. I gave myself the day off and spent the time puttering around my apartment, taking care of minor chores.Monday morning, I got up as usual, pulled on my sweats and my Sauconys, and did a three-mile jog. The cloud cover was dense and the surf was a muddy brown. The rain had eased, but the sidewalks were still wet, and I splashed through shallow puddles as I ran the mile and a half to the bathhouse where I did the turnaround. The earthworms had emerged and lay strewn across the sidewalk like lengths of gray string from an old floor mop. The path was also littered with snails traversing the walk with all the optimism of the innocent. I had to watch where I stepped to keep from crushing them.Back at my place, I picked up my gym bag and headed over to the gym. I parked my car in the only space available, tucked between a pickup truck and a late-model van. Even from the parking lot, I could hear the clank of machines, the grunts of a power lifter straining with a dead lift. Inside, the rock-and-roll music coming in through the speakers competed with a morning news show airing on the ceiling-mounted TV set. Two women on the stair machines climbed patiently while a third woman and two men trotted smartly on treadmills set at double speed. All five sets of eyes were focused on the screen.I signed in, idly asking Keith, at the desk, if he knew Clint Augustine. Keith’s in his twenties, with a busy brown mustache and a gleaming shaven head.He said, “Sure, I know Clint. You’ve probably seen him in here. Big guy, white-blond hair. He usually works out at five o’clock when the place first opens up. Sometimes he comes in later with his clients, mostly married chicks. They’re a specialty of his.” Keith’s intermittent use of steroids caused him to swell and shrink according to his consumption. He was currently in shrunken form, which I personally preferred. He was one of those guys with a great chest and biceps, but very little in the way of lower-body development. Maybe he figured because he stood behind a counter, he didn’t need to buff out anything below his waist.“I heard he’s been working with Crystal Purcell.”“He did for a while. They’d come in late afternoon, Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. Isn’t she the wife of the guy who disappeared a while back? Man, that’s a tough one. Something skanky going on there.”“Could be,” I said. “Anyway, I gotta get a move on. Thanks for the info.”“Sure thing.”I pulled on my workout gloves and found a quiet spot. I stretched out on a gray mat and started with my ab routine, two sets of fifty sit-ups, hands behind my head, my bent legs resting on a free-weight bench. I could smell glue fumes wafting through the asphalt-gray carpeting. The Nautilus and Universal machines looked like elaborate constructions built from a full-size Erector set: metal verticals, bolts, pulleys, angled joints. Once I finished my sit-ups, I started with leg curls, the exercise I most despise. While I counted fifteen reps, I pictured my hamstrings popping loose and rolling up like window shades. I moved on to leg extensions, which burned like hell, but at least didn’t threaten any crippling side effects. Back, chest, and shoulders. I finished my workout with preacher curls and dumbbell curls. I saved the best machine for last: triceps extensions, always a favorite of mine. I left the gym damp with perspiration.Home again, I showered, pulled on a turtleneck, jeans, and my boots, grabbed a bite of breakfast, and packed myself a brown-bag lunch. I reached the office at nine o’clock and put a call through to the police department, where Detective Odessa assured me he’d do yet another computer check to see if there was any sign of Dow Purcell. He’d already sorted through numerous bulletins describing the unidentified dead throughout the state. There were no Caucasian males in Purcell’s age range. Local police, sheriff’s department, and CHP officers were being briefed weekly on the importance of keeping an eye out for him. Odessa had increased his coverage, papering most of the medical facilities in the surrounding counties in case Purcell showed up incoherent or comatose.I briefed him on the people I’d spoken to so far. When I told him about the issue of Medicare fraud, he said, “Yeah, we know that.”“Well, why didn’t you tell me?”“Because it’s Paglia’s call and we’re under orders from him.”By the end of the conversation, it was clear we were both still in the dark, though he did seem to appreciate my bringing him up to date. He was even moderately charitable about Blanche’s consulting a psychic, which surprised me somehow. I forget that police detectives, in addition to being hard-assed, are also capable of entertaining doubts about such things.I pulled out the phone number for Jacob Trigg, whose name Crystal had given me, saying he was Dow’s best friend. I dialed and spoke briefly to him, explaining who I was, and we set up an appointment for ten o’clock Tuesday morning at his place. I made a note on my calendar and then called Joel Glazer at the office number Crystal had given me. His secretary told me he was working from home and gave me the phone number there so I could reach him. I called the number, briefly identified myself and the fact that Fiona’d hired me. He seemed pleasant and cooperative to the extent that he gave me his address and set up a meeting for one o’clock that afternoon. I then called Santa Teresa Hospital and learned that Penelope Delacorte was now Director of Nursing Services, in her office from nine to five weekdays. I made a note of the title and decided to try her later in the day, after my meeting with Glazer. Lastly, on my own behalf, I made a call to Richard Hevener, whose machine picked up. I left a message inquiring about the status of my rental application. I tried to sound especially winsome on the phone in hopes that might tip the odds in my favor.At lunchtime, I sat at my desk and ate the peanut-butter-and-pickle sandwich I’d brought from home. At twelve-thirty, I left the building and started walking around the block, hoping I’d remember where I parked my car. I found the VW, unmolested, at the corner of Capillo and Olivio, much closer than I’d thought and in the opposite direction. For the fifth day straight, the sky was overcast, a brooding gray, roiling at the edges where a thick mass of clouds threatened rain.Santa Teresa is constrained on the north by the mountains and on the south by the Pacific Ocean, limiting geographic growth. The westernmost neighborhoods feather out as far as Colgate; the easternmost sweeping into Montebello where the prices jump. Horton Ravine, where I was headed, is a moneyed enclave, carved out by land grant and deed, whereby successive California governors rewarded military leaders for killing people really, really well. The resulting three thousand plus acres were passed from rich man to richer, until the last in line, a sheep rancher named Tobias Horton, had the good sense to subdivide the land into saleable lots, thus making a killing of another kind.I took the 101 as far as the La Cuesta off-ramp, turned left, and followed the road around to the right, heading for the main entrance, which consisted of two massive stone pillars with HORTON RAVINE spelled out in curlicue wrought iron arching between them. The Ravine was lush, the trunks of sycamores and live oaks stained dark from the recent rains. Most of the roads are called “Via something”; via being the Spanish word for “way” or “road.” I drove past the Horton Ravine Riding Club, continued a mile, and finally took a right turn and went up a hill.The Glazers lived on Via Bueno (“Road Good”... if I remember rightly from my brief matriculation in night-school Spanish). The house was 1960s modern, a dazzling white cluster of abstract forms superimposed on one another in what amounted to an architectural pig pile. Three soaring stories were variously angled and cantilevered with a steeply pitched tower driving straight up out of the center of the mass. There were wide decks on all sides and large expanses of glass, into which birds probably regularly propelled themselves and died. When I’d first met Dana Jaffe, she was living in a small housing tract in the town of Perdido, thirty miles to the south. I wondered if she was as conscious as I of how far she’d come.I parked in a circular motor court and crossed to the low sweeping stairs that led up to the front door. A few minutes passed and then she answered the bell. I could have sworn she was wearing the same outfit I’d seen her in the first time we’d met-tight, faded jeans and a plain white T-shirt. Her hair was still the color of honey, with silver, as fine as silk threads, now appearing in the mix. She’d had it cut and layered, every strand falling into place as she moved her head. Her eyes were khaki or hazel, sometimes reflecting green, sometimes brown under softly feathered brows. Her most arresting feature was her mouth. Her teeth were slightly occluded and the overbite made her lips appear plump and pouty.She said, “Hello, Kinsey. Joel said you’d be stopping by. Please come in. Let me take that.”“This is beautiful,” I said as I stepped inside, slipping off my slicker, which I handed to her. While she hung it in the closet, I had time to gape. The interior was cathedral-like, a vast space crowned by a vaulted ceiling thirty feet above. Bridges and catwalks connected the irregular levels of the house and shafts of sunlight formed geometric patterns on the smooth stone floor.Dana joined me, saying, “Fiona probably told you we’re redoing the place.”“She mentioned that,” I said. “She also said you suggested me for this job, which I appreciate.”“You’re entirely welcome. I confess I didn’t like you back then, but you did seem honest and persistent, a regular little terrier when it came to finding Wendell. Your friend, Mac Voorhies, at California Fidelity, gives you the credit for the fact I got to keep the money.”“I’ve wondered about that. Last I heard they were still debating the issue. I’m glad it worked out. How well did you know Dow?”“I ran into him occasionally because of Joel, but we weren’t friends. I met Fiona after they divorced, so I tend to side with her. I’m polite when I run into him, but that’s about it. Joel’s on the phone at the moment, but I’ll take you up to the office as soon as he’s done. Would you like a look around?”“That’d be great.”“We’re doing this piecemeal. Not my preference. Fiona and I wanted to do it all at once... a full installation, which is so much more dramatic and lots more fun, but Joel put his foot down, so we’re doing the job in stages. This is the living room, obviously...”She rattled off the rooms as I followed along behind. “Sun room, den, formal dining room. The kitchen’s in there. Joel’s office is in what we call the ‘crow’s nest’ upstairs.”The rooms were clearly in transition. The floors were covered with palace-sized Oriental carpets, probably quite old to judge by the softness of the colors and intricate designs. The furniture, which I assumed was chosen by the deceased Mrs. Glazer, appeared to be almost entirely antique, with massive armoires and occasional pieces in polished mahogany. The few upholstered pieces were done in white linen, the lines clean and clear. A variety of fabric swatches had been draped across the chairs and two-inch samples of paint colors had been taped in various places on the wall. Some of the upholstery fabrics I hadn’t seen since my youth, when my aunt Gin would take me to visit her friends. Jungle prints, fakey-looking leopard skin, banana palms, bamboo, zigzags, and chevrons in shades of orange and yellow. The wall paint under consideration was that noxious shade of green that marked most 1930s bathrooms when they hadn’t been done in an oh-so-modern mix of pink and black.“She’s found us a sharkskin-top Ruhlmann desk for this wall, with an Andre Groult mirror. We’re thrilled about that.”“I can imagine,” I murmured. I could see where Fiona’s art deco taste wouldn’t be completely out of place, but I couldn’t for the life of me picture these cool, elegant rooms redone in black lacquer, plastic, leather, enamel, curly maple, and chrome.Dana was saying, “Joel was widowed four years ago. He lived here with his wife for the past twenty-two years. The truth is, I’d love to level it, but he can’t see the point.”Good for him, I thought. “How’s Michael?” I was afraid to ask about her younger son, Brian, because the last time I’d seen him he was on his way back to jail.“He and Brendon are fine. Juliet left. I guess she got tired of mar-riage and motherhood.”“Too bad.”“Well,” she said, briskly, “let me check and see if Joel’s off the phone.”I realized she was just as eager as I to avoid talk of Brian. She moved to an intercom in the dining room, pressing a button that apparently rang through to Joel’s office. “Sweetie, are you free?” I heard his muffled reply.She turned with a smile. “He says to come right on up. I’ll walk you to the elevator. Maybe we can chat when you’ve finished your talk with him.”“I’d like that.”
