---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "Q Is for Quarry - index_split_026.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - Q Is for Quarry"
tags: ["door", "one", "room", "could", "said", "medora", "take", "know", "back", "want", "right", "like", "get", "would", "dolan", "justine", "sure", "time", "open", "see", "tell", "talk", "look", "thought", "someone"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/QIsforQuarry-indexsplit026html

---


Unknown
Chapter 25The night was cold and windy, but the drive was so brief, there wasn’t time enough for Dolan’s heater to kick in. There was scarcely a building in Quorum more than two stories tall, so there wasn’t much protection from the blasts of chill air sweeping in off the desert. The sky was a brittle black and the presence of stars wasn’t as comforting as one might hope. Nature has her little ways of reminding us how small and frail we are: Our existence is temporary while hers will go on long after our poor flesh has failed.I parked in Medora’s driveway. The house was dark except for one lamp in the living room. As I crossed the patchy stretch of grass I realized the front door was standing open. I could see the vertical strip of dull light expand and contract as the wind ebbed and flowed. I hesitated and then knocked on the screen door frame. “Medora?”There was no sound from inside. I opened the screen door and called through the opening. “Medora?”I didn’t like the idea of intruding, but this was odd, especially given my suspicions about an intruder of my own. If someone had read my notes and spotted her name, her house might well be the next stop. I pushed the door open and eased in, closing it behind me. The room was dark except for a small table lamp. I could see Medora on the couch, lying on her back, her hands folded across her chest. I drew closer. She was snoring, her every exhalation infused with the fumes of metabolizing alcohol. If she woke to find me hovering she’d be startled, but I didn’t want to leave until I knew she was okay. A half-smoked cigarette, resting on the lip of the ashtray, had burned down to an inch of ash before it had gone out. The ice in her highball glass had long since melted away. Her prescription pill bottles appeared to be full and the caps were in place. At least she hadn’t overdosed in any obvious way, though I knew her practice of mixing whiskey with painkillers was dangerous.The house was cold and I could feel a breeze stirring. I crossed to the kitchen and flipped on the light. The back door stood open, creating a cross-ventilation that had drained all the heat from the rooms. I lifted my head and scanned the silence for any hint of sound. I remained where I was and did a visual survey. The back door was intact-no splintered wood, no shattered framing, and no broken glass. The windows were shut and the latches turned to the locked position. The kitchen counters were crowded with canned goods, boxes of cereal and crackers, packages of paper napkins, toilet tissue, paper towels, and cleaning products. It looked as if the dishes hadn’t been done in a week, though all she seemed to eat was cereal and soup. The trash can was overflowing, but aside from the mess, it didn’t appear that any-thing had been disturbed.I glanced over at Medora, chilled by the notion of how vulnerable she was. Anybody could have walked in, robbed her, assaulted her, killed her where she lay. If a fire had broken out, I doubt she’d have been aware. I closed the back door and locked it. I toured the rest of the house, which comprised no more than one small, dingy bathroom and two small bedrooms. Her housekeeping habits, such as they were, made it impossible to tell if anyone else had been in the rooms doing a quick search.I returned to the living room and leaned toward her. “Medora, it’s Kinsey. Are you all right?” She didn’t stir.I placed a hand lightly on her arm, saying, “Hey.” Nothing. I shook her gently, but the gesture didn’t seem to register. She was submerged in the murky depths of alcohol, where sound couldn’t penetrate and no light reached. I shook her again. She made a grunting noise, but otherwise remained unresponsive. I didn’t think I should leave her in her present state. I looked for a telephone and finally spotted one in the kitchen, mounted on the wall near the hall door. I searched one drawer after another until I found the phone book. I looked up Justine’s number and called her. She answered after four rings.“Justine? This is Kinsey. I’m really sorry to bother you, but I stopped by your mother’s house just now and found both doors standing open. She seems to have passed out. I think she’s okay, but I’m having trouble rousing her. Could you come over here? I don’t think I should leave her until you’ve seen for yourself.”“Damnation. Oh, hell. I’ll be there as soon as possible.” She hung up abruptly. I was sorry I’d annoyed her, but such is life.I returned to the couch and perched on the edge of the coffee table. I took Medora’s hand and slapped it lightly. “Medora, wake up. Can you wake up?”Groggily, she opened her eyes. At first, she couldn’t seem to focus, but she finally coordinated her eyes and looked around the room, disoriented.“It’s me, Kinsey. Can you hear me?”She mumbled something I couldn’t understand.“Medora, did you take something for the pain? Let’s get you up, okay?” I slid an arm under her head, trying to lift her into a sitting position. “I’m going to pull you up here, but I need your help.”She seemed to gather herself, pushing up on one elbow, which enabled me to haul her upright. Her gaze settled on mine with an expression of confusion. “What’s happening?”“I don’t know, Medora. You tell me. Let’s get you on your feet and take a walk. Can you do that?”“What for? I’m fine. I don’t want to walk.”“Well, sit then and let’s talk. I don’t want you falling asleep again. Did you take something?”“A nap.”“I. know you took a nap, but your doors, were wide open and I was worried about you. Did you take any pills?“Earlier.”“How many? Show me what you took, was it this?”“And the other ones.”I checked the labels on the bottles: Valium, Tylenol with Codeine, Percocet, Xanax. “This is not a good idea. You’re not supposed to take all of these at the same time, especially if you’ve had a drink. It’s not safe. Are you feeling okay?”“Dr. Belker gave me those.”“But you shouldn’t take them when you drink. Didn’t he explain that?”“That case I couldn’t take ’em at all. I drink every day.” She smiled I at my goofiness, having settled that point. We went on in this fashion, with Medora offering short declarative sentences in response to my continued questions. While it was hardly scintillating conversation, it did serve its intended purpose, which was to keep her in contact with reality. By the time Justine arrived, fifteen minutes later, Medora was more alert and in control of herself.Justine shed her coat and tossed it on the back of a chair. “Sorry it took so long, but I was waiting for Cornell. I. finally called my next-door neighbor and she came over to watch the girls.”Medora had focused on Justine with an air of humility and embarrassment. “I didn’t tell her to call you. I wouldn’t do that.” Justine sat down beside her mother and took her hand. “How many times have we been through this, Mother? You can’t keep doing this. I have a life of my own.”“All I had was one drink and a pain pill.”“I’m sure you did. How many?”“The usual.”“Never mind. Just skip it. I shouldn’t waste my breath. Are you all right?”“I’m fine. You didn’t have to leave the girls and come over.”“She says the doors were wide open. What was that about?”“I closed them. I did. I remembered what you said.”“Let’s just get you into bed. We can talk about this later when you’re more yourself.”“I’m myself,” she said blearily, as Justine assisted her to her feet. Medora was a bit tottery.“You need help?”Justine shook her head, intent on maneuvering her mother around the sharp-cornered coffee table, across the room, and into the short hallway that led to her bedroom. I could hear the two of them murmuring, Medora apologizing while Justine went about the business of getting her to bed.Five minutes later, Justine returned, rubbing her arms reflexively. “I swear she’s getting worse. I don’t know what to do with her. Geez, the place is freezing.”“It’s warmer than it was.”She went over to the thermostat. “It’s turned off. What’s she doing, trying to save money on the heating bill? No wonder she gets sick. She had pneumonia two months ago.” She adjusted the lever and within seconds, I could hear the furnace click on.She sat down on the couch with a sigh that was laden with irritation. “I can’t tell you how many times I’ve talked to her about this. She takes out the garbage or goes to pick up the newspaper from the drive and then she either locks herself out or forgets to latch the door again.On a windy night like this, the doors bang and blow open. She never even knows.”“I’m not sure that’s what happened here, but it’s giving me the creeps. Could you take a look around and make sure nothing’s missing? Suppose someone’s been here.”“Why would anybody bother? There’s nothing worth stealing.”“I understand, but I don’t like the feel of it. Can you make a quick circuit for my sake?”“All right. You might as well follow me. This won’t take long, but you can see for yourself.” She leaned over and picked up the whiskey bottle from the coffee table. “Here.”I took the bottle and waited while she snagged the highball glass and the pill bottles lined up nearby. “Her doctor’s out of his mind. I’ve had this discussion with him a hundred times. They’re old friends, so she comes along right after me and talks him into it.”She gave the kitchen a cursory look while she poured her mother’s whiskey down the drain. She emptied all the pills into the trash, where I heard them rattling toward the bottom like a cupful of BB’s. She tossed in the empty whiskey bottle. “I’ll take care of this later,” she said, referring to the overflowing trash can and the pile of dishes in the sink. “Things look fine in here. The place is a pigsty, but no more than usual.”I trailed after her while she looked into the bathroom and the second bedroom. The latter must have been her room as a kid, the one she’d been forced to share with Charisse. The twin beds were still in place, but most of the remaining space was taken up with piles of clothing, boxes, and miscellaneous junk. I nearly confided my suspicion about someone having entered my room, but I thought better of it. I didn’t have proof and I didn’t want to sound completely paranoid. Besides, it would only encourage her to ask questions I didn’t want to answer.As we were returning to the living room, she said, “I heard about Pudgie. It’s horrible.”“News travels fast.”“Trust me, everybody knows by now.”“Who told you?”“Todd Chilton called. He’s a deputy – ““I met him. Why did he call you?”“Oh, right. He remembered I dated Pudgie and he thought I should know. From what he said, it was gross. At least I got that impression reading between the lines. He says you’re the one who figured it out.”“Someone would have noticed before long,” I said, thinking about the smell. I filled in a few brush strokes, avoiding anything of substance. I was certain Detective Lassiter would limit the information that reached the public.“Why’d you stop by?”“I had a question for your mom. I know this seems minor, but I was curious. The first time I talked to her, she said she’d gone to the police the day Charisse disappeared. But according to the police report, she waited a week. I was hoping she’d explain the discrepancy.”“She didn’t tell you about the note?”“From Charisse? Not that I remember.”“She probably forgot to mention it. Her mind’s completely shot from all the crap she takes. The note said she’d decided to go see her mother and she’d be back in three days. We thought she’d show up, but a week passed and Mom started getting worried. That’s when she talked to the police.”“You saw the note yourself?”“Sure. She’d left it on the bed.”“And the handwriting was hers?”“As far as I could tell.”“Did your mother save it?”“I doubt it. Why would she do that?”“Could you ask her please?”“Right now?”“I’d appreciate it.”She left the living room and returned to her mother’s bedroom, where I could hear her insistent questioning and Medora’s foggy response. I heard drawers being opened and shut. Moments later, Justine returned. “I don’t believe this. She says she saved the note because she didn’t want Social Services blaming her when Charisse took off. She thought if they ever asked, she could show the note as proof that Charisse left of her own accord.”“Amazing. That’s great. I’d love to see it.”“Well, that’s just it. She can’t remember where she put it. She thought it was in the chest of drawers, but it’s not there now. Knowing her, it could be anywhere. She’s such a slob.”“Maybe we can look again when she’s on her feet.”Justine gave me a look. “Yeah, right. Listen, I need to get back to the girls. Cornell must be home by now, but just in case. Let me turn off some lights and I’ll walk you to your car. It’s dark as pitch out there.”I waited while she double-checked, making sure the back door was locked. She turned off the lights, except for one in the hall. She tested the thumb lock on the front door, flipped it to the locked position, and pulled it shut behind her. She took her keys from her coat pocket and crossed the yard to her Ford sedan, which was parked in the driveway behind Dolan’s car.“Did you guys go down and have your fingerprints taken?”“Edna went Monday, but I haven’t had a chance. I’ll pop in tomorrow while I’m out running errands.”“What about the others?”“Adrianne said she’d try later in the week.”“What about Ruel and Cornell?”“Don’t look at me. I don’t want to be the one to nag them. It’s not my job.”“You’re right. Thanks anyway. I’ll bug them myself.”I drove to the motel with an eye on my rearview mirror. The wide streets were deserted. Businesses were shut down and most of the houses were dark. Once in my room, I spent a few minutes assuring myself everything was exactly as I’d left it. My book was facedown on the bed where I’d placed it, the bedspread still rumpled where I’d pushed it aside. The table lamp was on and the warm light made the room seem cozy. The windows were latched and I made sure the drapes were properly closed. Didn’t want any boogermen to peek in at me. After that, I stripped out of my clothes and into the oversize T-shirt I used as a nightie. I washed my face, brushed my teeth, and slid into bed. I thought my paranoia might keep me awake, but since I’m a person of no depth whatever, I fell asleep right away.At 2:06, the phone rang. I reached for the handset automatically, noting the time as I placed it against my ear. “What.”“Kinsey?”“What.”“This is Iona.”“Okay.”“Frankie wants to talk to you.”“About what?”“Pudgie.”“Put him on.”“In person.”I leaned over and flipped on the table lamp, which made me squint painfully and probably put permanent wrinkles on my face. “Why are you calling me in the dead of night? I’m asleep.”“I would’ve called earlier, but he just got here.”“Got here where?”“Quorum. He wants you to meet us at the all-night diner. Know the one I mean? On Main Street. It’s called the Chow Hound.”I closed my eyes. “No offense here, but there’s no way I’m going out at this hour to talk to Frankie Miracle, so scratch that idea.”“What if he comes there? We’re calling from a pay phone. We’re not far.”“Like how far?”“A block.”“Why isn’t he on the phone instead of you?”“He’s afraid you’ll say no.”I laughed. “He’s worried about me? Iona, the guy’s a killer. He stabbed a woman fourteen times.”“But he’s paid for his crime. He went to prison and now he’s out.”“Oh, crap. Why am I arguing with you? If you want to come over, I’ll open the window and talk to him through the screen. That’s as much as I can offer.”“Okay.”I hung up and went into the bathroom to brush my teeth. This was not the kind of hotel that offered complimentary robes (hell, I felt lucky they offered complimentary toilet paper!), so I pulled on a sweatshirt. I thought about it briefly and pulled on my jeans. By then, I could see headlights arc across the drapes. I turned off the lamp and crossed to the window, peering out as Frankie’s white pickup pulled into a slot two doors down. Iona was at the wheel. She waited in the truck with the engine running, probably trying to keep warm, while Frankie got out on the passenger side and slammed the door. I said, “Great. Wake everybody up. I’ll feel safer that way.”I watched him check room numbers until he got to mine. As soon as he was close, I slid the window open a crack. “Hello, Frankie.”“Hi. Can I come in?”“No.”“Come on. I can’t stand around out here. It’s fuckin’ cold.”“I don’t need a weather report. I know it’s cold. You want to talk, I’m listening, but get on with it.”“All right,” he said, irritably. He paused to light a cigarette. Despite the low-watt outside lighting, I could see him clearly – the brown wavy hair, the smooth baby face. He peered over his shoulder, his manner embarrassed. “I heard about Pudgie. I just wanted you to know I had nothing to do with it.”“Good for you.”“Don’t you want to know the rest?”“Sure.”“The cops have already been around-Lieutenant Dolan and some pal of his. I thought my landlord was talking about you, but he said it was an old guy.”“Stacey Oliphant.”“That’s him.”“They’re good guys. They’re fair. You should be talking to them.” “I hate cops. What pigs. I’d rather talk to you.”“What for? I’m just going to turn around and ask you the same questions Lieutenant Dolan would have asked.”“You want to know where I was Friday night, right? I was in Santa Teresa, working my regular shift. Eleven to seven. And that’s the truth.”“I thought you were down here with Iona.”“Who told you that?”“Weren’t you with her when she called and talked to Pudgie Thursday night?”“Sure, but I left Friday morning and drove back to Santa Teresa.”“Anybody see you at work?”“Two-thirty in the morning, I’m moppin’ floors, not entertaining the troops. Reason I like the job is it’s quiet and nobody’s there to hassle me.”“You were completely alone.”“At that hour? Of course. Who’s going to be there? The place’s all locked up.”“I don’t know. Someone else on the cleaning crew? A lawyer working late? A building that size can’t be empty.”“For starters, there’s nobody else on the crew. I’m it. And second, even if there was someone in the building, how would I know? Six floors is tough. I got a lot of ground to cover. Some lawyer’s workin’ late, he’s not going to stop and make small talk with the likes of me. So. Nobody saw me. You’ll have to take my word that I was there all night.”“You drove all the way down here to tell me this?”“Hey, I could’ve had her alibi me, which she’d’ve done in a heartbeat, but I wanted to play straight.”“Good boy. Now what?”“Iona thought you might put in a good word for me.”“Frankie, come on. You know better than that. No one gives a shit what I think. My opinion carries no weight at all. It’s like Iona think-ing I had the clout to offer Pudgie a deal. It’s ridiculous.”“Those cops like you.”“Sure they do, but so what? Look, I’m perfectly willing to pass the story along, but trust me, without an alibi, my big, hot endorsement won’t help. ““But you believe me?”“Let’s put it this way; nothing would make me happier than your telling the truth. I’m sure the cops will be crazy about the idea, too.”He dropped his cigarette and stepped on the ember with the toe of his boot. “You try, okay?”“I’ll call Lieutenant Dolan tomorrow. Meantime, if I were you I’d get back to town before your PO gets wind of what’s going on.”“I’ll do that. And thanks.”“You’re welcome.”I closed the window and had it latched again before Frankie reached the truck. I heard the door slam and she backed out, the headlights doing a reverse angle on the draperies as she pulled away. I shook my head. What a baby. Gone was the tough guy I’d met the first time around. As for his story, I wasn’t sure whether to believe him or not. Sincerity aside, he was capable of manipulation if it suited his purposes.In the morning, I changed rooms. There were far too many people who knew where I was and I didn’t feel safe. I chose an innocuous location on the second floor in the middle of a stretch of rooms. No ice machines. No vending machines. No reason to be up there unless you were a paid motel guest. At ground level, I figured I was a sitting duck for Peeping Toms or guys with a penchant for picking locks. Up here, even if the housekeeper propped my door open for hours on end, it would take nerve for someone to climb the stairs and pretend to be wandering around lost. From the second floor I had a nice view of the parking lot. I’d left Dolan’s car in a row of cars to one side so there was no way to associate the vehicle with my whereabouts.At 9:15, I called Dolan’s house. Stacey picked up. I told him my concern that someone had entered my room and had taken a long hard look at my notes. He told me to change rooms, which I told him I’d done. He told me Dolan had left for an appointment with the cardiologist. I told him about Medora’s house, the note, and Frankie’s late-night visit. He told me I better watch my step and I said I would. Then he said, “What have we picked up in the way of elimination prints?”“We’re not doing so well. Last I heard Edna had gone in, but none of the other four.”“What’s up with that? I don’t like them thinking they can bypass us. Go back and threaten. Tell them it looks bad, like maybe one of them has something to hide.”“So how’s Dolan doing?”“He’s good. I’d say good. Doing better than I thought.”“You think the living arrangements are going to work?”“Jury’s still out on that. I could probably do worse-though, frankly, the guy’s a colossal pain in the ass. Of course, he says the same thing about me.”“Makes you the perfect pair,” I said. “Better than some of the marriages I’ve seen.”“Amen to that. What’s the latest down there?”“I haven’t heard anything since I was at the Tuley-Belle last night, but I can stop by the sheriffs office and talk to Lassiter.”“Do that and call me back. I’ve been trying to get in touch with him, but so far no luck. Meantime, we’ll see what we can find out about Frankie’s whereabouts on Friday night.”“Great. Tell Dolan I said hi. I really miss you guys.” Stacey said.“Ditto. And you take care of yourself.”I retrieved Dolan’s car and drove the few short blocks to the Sheriffs Department. Todd Chilton and a civilian clerk seemed to be the only ones in. He was chatting with one of the church ladies I’d seen at Edna’s. She was in her seventies, wearing a pale green leisure suit. Her hair had just been done and it puffed out as nicely as a dandelion. She’d placed a parking ticket on the counter, and I waited politely while she wrote out a check and tore it from her register. I flicked a quick look at the name printed on the face of the check: Adele Opdyke.“How are you, Adele? We met at Edna’s on Saturday. Nice seeing you again.“Nice seeing you, too.” She seemed flustered to realize I was standing close enough to see what she was doing. “Don’t go thinking this ticket’s mine. It’s my husband’s. He parked in a fire lane Friday night, late going to a movie. He’s always doing that. Doesn’t matter how many times I tell him not to.”Deputy Chilton said, “Why are you the one paying? He’ll never learn this way.”“You’re right, you’re right. I’m entirely too good to him. I should make him take care of it. It would serve him right.” She glanced at me. “You’re that private detective, but I forget your name. Edna told us all about the fabric in her quilt.”“Kinsey Millhone,” I said. “Did you get that mailing out?”“It’s done and it’s been delivered by now.” She turned back to Chilton. “How’s the investigation? That poor Cedric had a sorry life and what a terrible end.”“We’re all working overtime, doing everything we can. Quorum PD’s pitching in so we’re on it.”“That’s good.” She tucked her checkbook in her handbag. “Well, I’m off to run my errands. I wanted to get this done first before I forgot. Nice talking to you.”As soon as she left, I said, “I was looking for Detective Lassiter, but I gather he’s not here.”“He’s at the Tuley-Belle. The coroner thinks Pudgie was killed with a tire iron, which hasn’t turned up yet. Detective Lassiter thinks it’s possible it’s still out there – dumped or buried. Detective Oliphant left a couple of messages for him, but they’ll have to wait. I know he’s concerned about this business with the McPhees’ fingerprints, but we’ve got all our personnel at the crime scene, so even if they came in there’s nothing we could do.”“Well. First things first. I’ll tell Stacey someone will get back to him later in the day. I’m sure he’d like an update.”
