---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "R Is for Ricochet - index_split_032.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - R Is for Ricochet"
tags: ["beck", "car", "reba", "door", "marty", "hand", "one", "could", "said", "two", "u", "time", "like", "head", "computer", "get", "right", "gun", "took", "turned", "back", "elevator", "opened", "eye", "lot"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/RIsforRicochet-indexsplit032html

---


Unknown
Chapter 31Reba wanted me to make the call to Beck. We found a phone booth outside a supermarket. The store was a bright island, icy fluorescent lights reflected in the shiny paint finish of the dozen or so cars in the parking lot out front. This was the store where I did my weekly shopping, and I longed for nothing so much as to buy milk and eggs and then wend my way home.Reba put a handful of coins and a slip of paper with Beck’s home and office numbers on the metal shelf under the phone. “Try his home phone first. If Tracy answers, maybe she’ll think he has a girlfriend,” she said.“He does. Her name is Onni.”“She probably knows about her. I’m talking someone new. Might as well bug the shit out of her while we can.”“That’s not nice. I thought women were supposed to be nice.”“I wouldn’t bet on it if I were you.”I picked up the handset. “So what am I supposed to say to him?”“Tell him to meet us at the East Beach parking lot in fifteen minutes. As soon as he hands Marty over, he gets his computer.”I held the handset against my chest. “Please don’t do this. I’m begging you. What’s to prevent him from snatching the damn thing? You don’t even have a gun.”“Of course I don’t have a gun. I’m a convicted felon. I can’t carry,” she said, as though offended by the very idea.“What if Beck has one?”“He doesn’t even own a gun. Besides, we’ll be right out in plain sight. Anyone driving along Cabana Boulevard can see us. Here, give me that.”She grabbed the handset and put it against my ear, picked up some coins, and dropped them in the slot. In addition to the dial tone, I could have sworn I heard the buzz of electricity running through my frame. My heart rate was picking up and my insides felt like a fuse box with all the lines shorting out. She punched in Beck’s home number just to hurry things along. At the first ring, Reba leaned her head against mine and tilted the handset so she could listen in. I said, “This feels like high school. I hate this.”“Would you shut up?” she hissed.After three rings, he picked up. “Yes.”My mouth was dry. “Beck, this is Kinsey.”“God damn you! Where’s Reba? The fuckin’ bitch. I want what’s mine and she better make it quick.”Reba grabbed the handset, all sweetness and light now that she had him by the balls. “Hey, baby. How’s by you? I’m right here.”Whatever Beck’s reply, it must have been tart because she laughed with delight. “Oh my, now. You don’t have to be crude. I was thinking we should get together and have a chat.”I waited, staring off across the parking lot, while she spelled out the proposal and the nature of the trade. Then they argued about the rendezvous, tussling to see which of them was going to come out on top. The East Beach bathhouse, at the corner of Cabana and Milagro, was where I did the turnaround on my morning runs. Even at night, the area is exposed and well lighted, the Santa Teresa Inn just across the street from the entrance to the parking lot. There’s a small separate lot at the far end of the building, but she’d opted for the more public of the two. This showed a grain of common sense unusual for her. She insisted on meeting in fifteen minutes while he swore he couldn’t be there any sooner than half an hour. To this, she finally agreed. Score one for him. I was uneasy. I figured the more time she gave him, the more likely he was to round up some help. This must have occurred to her as well. “And Beck, one more thing. You bring anyone but Marty and you’ll eat it, big time. Yeah, well, same to you, you little shit!” She slammed down the phone and then shoved her hands in her jacket pockets. “God, I hate him. What a hairball.”I picked up the handset and reached for some coins. “I’m calling Cheney.”She took the handset and returned it to the cradle. “I don’t want Cheney. I don’t want anyone but us.”“I can’t do this. You and Beck can play all the games you want, but I’m out of it,” I said.“Okay. Fine. Take a hike. Drop me at my car and you’re off the hook,” she said. She turned and walked off.I’d hoped to jolt her into getting help, but she was having none of it. I blinked, staring at the pavement. What were my choices? Do it her way or risk... what? That she’d die or get hurt? Because Marty’d stolen the computer, she’d assumed Beck was the one who’d ordered the snatch, but what if he hadn’t? It might have been Salustio Castillo, who had just as much to lose. Beck might be bluffing. He might not have a clue where Marty was being held, and then what? All he had to do was grab the suitcase and what could she do? If it came right down to it, what could I do? Nothing. At the same time, she knew I wouldn’t leave her. There was too much at stake.Reluctantly, I followed. The car doors were locked and she waited, gaze averted, while I let myself in and tossed my bag on the backseat. I slid under the wheel, leaned over, and opened the door on her side. Reba got in and we sat there. I had my hands on the steering wheel, stalling while I racked my brain for some alternative. “There has to be a better way to do this.”“Great. Spell it out. I’m all yours,” she said.I didn’t have an answer. The meeting was scheduled for 11:00 P.M., in roughly twenty-five minutes. Technically we had time enough to drive to my place, where I could pick up my gun. I nearly banged my head on the steering wheel. What was I thinking? A gun was out of the question. I wasn’t going to shoot anyone. Over a computer? How absurd.On the other hand... shit... on the other hand... if Marty’s home phone was tapped, the FBI must have a tap on Beck’s telephone lines as well. One of their agents must have heard Beck and Reba wrangling, so maybe they’d taken note and the cavalry was already on the way.Out of the comer of my eye, I saw Reba check her watch, saying, “Tick-tock. Tick-tock. Time’s a-wasting.”“So where’s Marty all this time?”“He didn’t say. I’m assuming somewhere close.”I shook my head in frustration. “I don’t believe I’m doing this.” I turned the key in the ignition and backed out of the space. “Let’s at least take a minute to scope out the area, or have you done that?”“Not really. Why bother? I figure you’re the expert.”The drive seemed to take forever. I cut over to the freeway, thinking to speed our progress. Big mistake. Traffic was heavy, taillights stacked up, as two lanes of cars amassed in the wake of an accident in one of the northbound lanes. I could see lights flashing where the CHP and the emergency vehicles had converged on the scene. There wasn’t actually an obstruction on our side of the road, but we were at a dead stop, anyway, while people paused to gawk.By the time we reached the off-ramp at Cabana, we had less than a minute to spare. I confess I sped the final mile and a half, hoping a cop would spot us and make a traffic stop. No such luck. The ocean was to our right, separated from the road by the beach, a bike path, and a wide strip of grass that was dotted with palm trees. On our left, we passed a string of motels and restaurants. The sidewalk was populated with tourists, which was oddly comforting somehow.At Milagro, I turned into the designated parking lot. There were no cars in evidence, which meant (perhaps) that if Beck was bringing goons, at least they hadn’t arrived before us. Reba told me to make a U-turn at the far end of the lot and circle back to the entrance. I did as instructed and then backed into a parking space, my car facing the street in case we needed to make a hasty retreat. We got out of the car. She flipped her seat forward and removed the suitcase. She popped the handle, extending it, and then rolled the case to the front of the car. “Might as well let him know we mean business,” she said.Behind us, the waves were drumming on the sand, gathering momentum before they battered the shore and then rolled back again. The water was intensely black with a fine sheen of white where moonlight caught the peaks of each wave. A damp breeze buffeted my hair and pushed against the legs of my jeans. I turned and scanned the beach behind us, hopping from foot to foot to keep warm. So far, to all appearances, we were alone.Reba leaned on the front fender, lit a cigarette, and smoked. Ten minutes passed. She checked her watch. “What’s this about? Does he want the friggin’ thing or not?”Across the street, hotel guests pulled in at the entrance to the Santa Teresa Inn. There were two valet parkers and a smattering of pedestrians. In the restaurant on the second floor, tables were arranged along the big curved front window. Diners were visible, though as dark as it was now, I doubted they could see us. A black-and-white patrol car approached and turned right, speeding up Milagro. I could feel my hopes flare and fade.“I think we should get out of here. I don’t like this,” I said.She looked at her watch again. “Not yet. He doesn’t show by 11:30, we’ll bail.”At 11:19 two cars crawled into view and turned into the lot. Reba dropped her cigarette and stepped on it. “That’s Marty’s car in front. The second one’s Beck.”“Is that Marty at the wheel?”“I can’t tell. It looks like him.?“Well, great then. No sweat. Get it over with,” I said.Reba crossed her arms, whether from cold or tension, I couldn’t be sure. Once in the lot, Marty’s car turned left, circled as we had, and made a slow return. He stopped his car thirty feet away and sat, engine idling, while Beck pulled up fifteen feet closer to us. The two sets of headlights formed a line of harsh spots. I raised a hand and shaded my eyes. I could see Beck at the wheel of his car, but I wasn’t at all convinced the second driver was Marty. A minute passed.Reba shifted restlessly. “What’s he doing?”“Reba, let’s go. There’s something off about this.”Beck got out of the car. He stood by the open door, his attention fixed on the rolling bag. He wore a dark raincoat, open along its length, sides flapping in the wind. “Is that it?”“No, Beck, it’s not. I’ve decided to leave town.”“Bring it over here and let’s have a look.”“Tell Marty to get out so we can see it’s him.”Beck called over his shoulder. “Hey, Marty? Give Reeb a wave. She thinks you’re someone else.”The driver in Marty’s car waved to us and blinked his headlights, then revved his engine like a stock car driver at the start of a race. I touched Reba’s arm, warbling, “Run...”I took off, breaking left, as Marty’s car pitched forward, tires chirping, the vehicle gathering speed as it bore down on us. Reba grabbed the handle of the rolling bag and scrambled after me. The suitcase teetered on the uneven surface of the parking lot and then toppled to one side. She headed for the street, dragging it after her. I could hear it scraping along the pavement, as awkward as an anchor if she hoped to escape. I yelled, “Dump that!”The driver in Marty’s car slammed on his brakes and turned the wheel so his rear end swung around, missing my car by inches. Two men jumped out, the driver and a second man who suddenly appeared from the back where he’d been concealed.Beck stood with his hands in his coat pockets, watching with detachment as Reba abandoned the suitcase and took off at a dead run. The two men were fast. She’d gone no distance at all when one tackled her from behind and the two of them went down.I reversed myself and headed in her direction. I had no plan. I didn’t give a shit about the suitcase, but I wasn’t going to leave Reba on her own. She was struggling, kicking at the guy who’d tackled her. He punched her in the face. Her head jerked and banged against the ground. I reached him as he raised his fist to punch her again. I hooked my arms around his right arm and hung on for dear life. Someone grabbed me from behind. He pinned my arms against my sides, lifted me off the ground, and then swung me away from his pal. I craned my neck for sight of Reba, who’d rolled over on her side. I watched as she pulled herself up on her hands and knees. She seemed dazed, blood pouring out of her mouth and nose. The guy who’d punched her turned to me. He lifted my feet and the two hauled me over to Marty’s car. I arched my back, trying to free myself, but the guy simply tightened his grip and there was nothing I could do.Beck crossed to Marty’s car and opened one of the rear doors. The guy in whose arms I was locked fell into the backseat and dragged me in on top of him. He flipped me so that I was pinned under him, my face mashed against the upholstery. His weight was so crushing, I couldn’t draw a breath. I thought my ribs would collapse, crushing my lungs in the process. I tried a groan, but all I could manage was a huffing sound, barely audible.“Get the fuck off her,” someone snapped.The guy dug an elbow in my back as he lifted himself off me. At the same time, he took my right wrist and wrenched my arm up behind me while he shoved my head toward the floor. I was staring at the floor mats, my nose six inches away. Someone folded my legs in and slammed the door. Half a second later, I heard Beck’s car door slam. He started his engine while the driver of Marty’s car slid under the wheel, shut the door, and started the car. He pulled away sedately. We slowed at the exit to the parking lot. No squealing of brakes. No calling attention to ourselves in any way. As far as I knew, Reba was still out there on the asphalt, trying to stanch the blood gushing from her nose. I’d caught a glimpse of my backseat companion, who had a white gauze patch taped across his left eye. Two harsh red and purple bruises ran along his cheek like streaks of paint. The chair leg must have come close to taking that eye out, which is probably why he’d so relished mauling me. I focused on the drive. I assumed we were forming a two-car motorcade. I thought about the kidnappings I’d seen in movies, how the heroine later identified the final destination by the sound of the tires crossing railroad tracks or the bleat of a foghorn in the distance. Most of what I heard was my companion’s labored breathing. Neither of the two guys was in as good a shape as they appeared. Or perhaps, more flattering to us, Reba and I had put up more of a fight than they’d expected.We turned left onto Cabana Boulevard and proceeded at an easy pace for less than a minute before we slowed to a stop. I was guessing this was the light at the intersection of State and Cabana. The driver turned on the radio and music filled the car, a male vocalist singing, “I want your sex...”My new best friend said, “Turn that shit off.”The driver said, “I like George Michael.” But the radio did go off.“Roll your window down and see what Beck wants.”I could picture Beck’s car in the lane next to ours, him making that rolling gesture, leaning across the front seat of his car to converse. Annoyed, our driver said, “Okay; okay. Got it. I’m doing that!” And to the fellow in the backseat, “He has the key card, so we’re supposed to follow. How many times he tell us that?”Faintly, in the distance, I heard sirens approaching. The wailing grew louder, the sound splitting in two. Two cop cars, oh please.I tried turning my head, hoping for a glimpse of something out the window, but all that netted me was a searing jerk to my arm. The sirens were almost on top of us. I caught the strobe of lights from two patrol cars that passed in rapid succession. The sirens trailed down Cabana Boulevard, volume diminishing until it faded altogether. So much for help being on the way. We turned right on what I was guessing was Castle. When we slowed to a second stop, I imagined the light at Montebello Street. We started up again, proceeding at maybe ten miles an hour. I caught the hollow sound of the road as it went under the freeway. We came up the incline on the other side, which would put us on Granizo. Left on Chapel. We had to be going to Beck’s office, which was only a couple of blocks away. I knew the stores along the mall would be closed and the office buildings locked. The “card” the driver had referred to probably triggered the mechanical barrier to the underground garage. Sure enough, I felt us slow and then turn right, easing down a ramp. At this hour, the garage would be empty. We drove the length of the cavernous space and pulled into a spot. Beck must have parked just ahead of us because I heard his car door slam before our driver had a chance to shut his engine down.I was hauled unceremoniously from the backseat and set on my feet. I’d hoped to catch Beck’s eye, establish a connection, thinking I had a better chance of charming him than the goons on each side of me. He avoided my eyes, his face set. We waited while he opened his trunk and extracted the rolling bag. The sides were scraped gray, embedded with the beach sand accumulated from its being dragged across the pavement. The handle had snapped. Beck flipped the suitcase and knelt beside it. He unzipped the compartment and pulled open the flap.Empty.I stared as though trying to catch the mechanics of a magic trick. Reba had showed me the computer. It had been in there less than an hour ago, but where had it gone? The only time we’d been separated was when I’d left her in the alley while I went to fetch my car. She must have taken advantage of my absence to remove the computer and lock it in the trunk of her car. Which meant she’d anticipated Beck’s betrayal and she’d beat him to the punch. By the same token, he must have known she was going to pull a fast one, or why snatch me?Beck stood up and pushed the bag with his toe, his expression thoughtful. I was expecting fury, but he seemed bemused instead. Maybe he liked Reba’s taking the conflict to such extremes, imagining his ultimate victory the sweeter for it. He turned and walked toward the elevators.The three of us followed, our footsteps clattering like a herd of beasts in the vast empty space. The guy with the injured eye kept a steady pressure on the arm he’d wrenched up behind me. There was no way I could move without ripping my arm out like a cooked chicken wing. The elevator doors opened and the four of us trooped in. Beck pressed the button. The doors closed and the elevator began its ascent.“Why here?” I asked.“So Reba will know how to reach me. In case you haven’t noticed, we’re engaged in a little battle of wits.”“That’d be hard to miss.”Beck sent me a fleeting smile.The doors opened at shop level. We emerged inside the Beckwith Building and trooped across the marble lobby to the public elevators that would take us to the fourth floor. I turned to look at Willard, who was sitting at his desk. He watched us pass without comment, his face the same handsome blank. I sent him what I hoped was a pleading look, but I got nothing in return. How could such a good-looking guy have so little life in his eyes? Couldn’t he see what was going on? Beck was his boss. Maybe he was paid the big bucks to look the other way.We went up to the fourth floor. The elevator doors opened to reveal offices filled with artificial light, the colors as dazzling as a Disney cartoon. Long sweeps of green carpeting, bright abstract paintings in a line down the hall. Healthy plants, modem furniture. I expected to be marched off to Beck’s office, but he steered me around the corner to the freight elevator. He pressed the call button and the doors opened. He moved to the back wall of the elevator and pushed aside the gray quilted padding. He punched the code into the keyboard mounted on the elevator wall. The door to his counting room slid open. Beck pressed the Stop Run button and stepped aside, turning to look at me. He had his hands in his raincoat pockets.Nobody said a word.Peripherally, I saw the counting and bundling machines. In the same flash, I saw that all the cardboard boxes had been emptied of loose bills, which were now packaged and stacked on the countertop.What I had no way to avoid was the sight of Marty. He’d been tied to a chair, beaten almost beyond recognition. His head was slumped on his chest. Even without a full view of his face, I knew he was dead. The curve of his cheek was puffy and dented, dried blood turning black at his hairline. Blood had oozed from his ears and coagulated along the collar of his shirt. I made a sound and jerked my head, blocking out the sight. Pain shot through me as though I’d been tapped with a taser gun. My palms were instantly damp and a flash of heat swept over me. I felt the blood drain out of my head. My legs buckled. The guy with the eye patch caught me and supported me briefly. Beck pressed a button and the doors to the counting room eased shut.I was walked, rubber-legged, to Beck’s office, where I sank onto the couch and covered my face with my hands. The image of Marty was like a photograph that I saw now in negative, light and dark reversed. There was conversation going on above my head-Beck instructing the two guys to get the body out of there and dispose of it. I knew they’d take him down in the service elevator to the ground floor, where they could drag him through the service corridor and out to the garage. They’d stick him in the trunk of his car and dump his body by the side of the road. Odd, so odd. I’d seen it in his eyes-this ending, this death-but I’d been unable to intervene.My vision condensed, threatening to shut down. Dark closed in from the periphery and I had that curious sensation in my ears-white noise-that told me how close I was to fainting. I put my head down between my knees. I remembered to breathe. Within a minute, the air seemed to cool and I could feel the darkness recede. When I looked up, the two guys were gone and Beck was sitting at his desk. “Sorry about that. It’s not what you think. He had a heart attack.”“He’s dead all the same and it’s your fault,” I said.“Reba had her share in it.”“How do you figure that?”“Take a look at what she did. We’re supposed to have a deal and she shows up with an empty suitcase? What’s she think, she can fuck with me and get away with it?”“She didn’t steal the computer. Marty took it with him when he left.”“I don’t give a shit who took it. All she had to do was give it back and he might be alive. The stress was what killed him. Couple of harmless punches and he was gone.”I couldn’t argue with the man. He was so sure of himself and his thinking was so bent. Where was this going to end? The contest between them had spiraled out of control and matters could only escalate. Beck had the upper hand. It was as simple as that. He had me.He smiled slightly. “You’re hoping she’ll call the police, but she won’t. You know why? Because it wouldn’t be any fun. She’s a gambler. She likes betting against the house. Poor girl’s not nearly as smart as she thinks she is.”“I don’t want to talk about this shit. The two of you can hash it out.”“I’m sure we will.”We sat, the two of us, waiting for the phone to ring. I’d given up trying to predict what either would do. My job was taking care of me. The problem was, I was tired and feeling panicky. The jitters were causing my hands to shake and I was having trouble marshaling my thoughts. Beck rocked back in his swivel chair, fiddling with a paperweight, tossing it from hand to hand.I noticed a row of cardboard boxes, lined up along the wall, all of them neatly taped and ready to be shipped. His office was a mess-shelves half empty, numerous bulging files on his desk. It looked as if Beck was all packed and ready to go. No wonder he was hell-bent on reclaiming his computer and his floppy disks. The disks and his hard drive contained his entire enterprise, every nickel he owned, all the money he’d salted away, shell corporations, Panamanian bank accounts. He wasn’t a man who remembered numbers or dates. He had to have it written down or it was lost to him. He knew as well as I did the data would be his undoing if it fell into the wrong hands.I said, “I have to go to the ladies’ room.”“No.”“Come on, Beck. You can tag along with me and listen at the door while I tinkle.”He shook his head. “Can’t do it. I want to be by the phone when she calls.”“What if it takes an hour?”“Tough.”We waited in silence. I checked my watch. The crystal was smashed, the hands permanently frozen at 11:22. I couldn’t see a clock from where I sat. Time dragged on and on. If and when Reba called, I had one more chance to signal the agents recording Beck’s calls. I wasn’t sure how I’d manage it or what I’d say, but the possibility was there.The silence went on for so long that when the phone finally rang, I jumped. Beck picked up the handset and held it loosely against his ear. He smiled and leaned forward, resting his elbows on his desk. “Hey, Reeb, good girl I knew you’d touch base. Are you ready to do business? Oh wait. Hang on a second. I have a friend of yours here and wondered if you wanted a chance to speak to her.”He pressed the speaker function on the phone and the office was filled with the hollow sound of Reba’s voice. “Kinsey? Oh, geez... are you okay?”I said, “I could use some help here. Why don’t you call Cheney and tell him what’s going on?”“Forget him. Let me talk to Beck,” she said, irritated.Now that his hands were free, Beck opened his desk drawer and took out a gun. He slipped the safety off and pointed it at me. “Hey, Reeb? Sorry to interrupt, but let’s cut to the chase. Listen to this.”He pointed at the wall above my head and fired. A sound came out of my throat, half scream and half moan. Tears sprang into my eyes. He said, “Oops. I missed.”She said, “Beck, don’t.”“I’m not very good with this thing. Willard tried to show me, but I can’t seem to get the hang of it. Should I try again?”“Ohmygod, ohmygod. Oh, please, Beck, don’t hurt her.”“I didn’t hear your answer. You ready to do business?”“Don’t fire again. Don’t shoot. Don’t do that. I’ll bring the thing. I got it. It’s in the trunk of my car. I put it in a duffel.”“You said that before. I believed you then, but look what you went and did. You pulled the big switcheroo.”“I swear. I’ll do it right this time. I’m not far. Give me two minutes. Just hang on. Please.”His tone was skeptical. “Gee, I don’t know, Reeb. I trusted you. I thought you’d play fair. What you did was bad. I’d say very bad indeed.”“This time I’ll bring it for sure. No tricks. I swear.”Beck was watching me while she spoke. He winked and smiled, having a wonderful time. “How do I know you won’t pull the same old gag? Give me a duffel and there’s nothing inside.”I stood up and pointed at the door, mouthing, “I have to pee.”He motioned me to sit again while Reba, sounding desperate, was saying, “I know what we can do. I’ll come in through the service corridor. You can go to Willard’s desk and watch on the monitor. I’ll unzip the bag and show you the computer. You can see it with your own eyes.”I clutched the crotch of my jeans and then clasped my hands, mouthing, Please... I pointed at the hall again.Distracted, he waved the gun at me, motioning me to sit down. I was edging out of the room. I held up a finger, whispering, “I’ll be right back.”I left the room and walked rapidly down the hall, footsteps soundless on the carpeting. I pulled office doors shut as I passed, letting them bang, bang, bang. I could hear him yell, “Hey!” He didn’t sound angry so much as annoyed at my disobedience.I doubled my pace. I reached the vestibule. Mercifully, the service elevator doors stood open. I moved to the back wall and punched in the code for the counting room. 5-15-1955. Reba’s birthday. The doors slid open.Out in the corridor, I could hear Beck shout my name, banging into offices in search of me. He fired a shot that made me jump even at this remove. While I’d known I wouldn’t shoot him, I wasn’t at all convinced he wouldn’t shoot me, accidentally if nothing else. I yanked off one shoe and set it in the path of the open elevator door. The door slid shut, encountered the shoe, and popped open again, a process that repeated like a tic. I turned and pressed the G button on the opposite panel, dispatching the freight elevator to the garage level. The doors were slow to respond, which gave me time enough to cross to the second set of doors. I yanked my shoe from the track and slipped into the counting room as the corridor doors slid shut. The doors to the counting room slid shut half a beat later, and I was safe. Temporarily, at any rate.Marty’s body was still there.I went on disconnect and blocked any and all emotional responses. Now was the wrong time. I tossed the shoe aside, not daring to take time to slip it on again. I looked at the ladder affixed to the wall, following the sight of it, rung by rung, all the way to the top. I started climbing, one shoe off and one shoe on, diddle-diddle-dumpling, my son John. I knew the trap door at the top opened onto the roof. Once there, I’d hide or hang over the parapet screaming until the cops showed up. Maybe officers were already scrambling-regular Santa Teresa cops, the SWAT team, hostage negotiators-all of them decked out in bulletproof vests.I flicked a look at Marty, still bound to his chair. Why hadn’t the guys done as Beck instructed? They were supposed to get him out of there, but they’d left him where he was. My hands were perspiring, but I ventured a second quick look down, noting what I’d failed to spot earlier. The counting and bundling machines were still sitting on the counter. The currency was gone. Instead of disposing of the body, the goons must have packed up the cash and removed that instead.I reached the top rung of the ladder and reached for the door directly above my head. I couldn’t find a lock or a knob or any means to open it. I ran my hand across the surface, looking for a hook or a handle, any kind of lever that might cause it to spring open. Nothing. I clung to the top rung, hanging on for dear life while I tried to get my fingertips in the crack. I banged on it with the flat of my hand, then pushed as hard as I could.Below, I heard the elevator door slide open. I laid my head against the ladder and held my breath.In a conversational tone, Beck said, “That door’s locked so you might as well come down. Reba’s on her way. Soon as we’ve settled up, you’re free to go.”I looked down at him. He was wearing his raincoat, apparently in preparation for his departure. He had the gun in one hand and it was pointed right at me. He probably didn’t have a clue how much pressure it took to pull the trigger. He inadvertently blew my head off, I’d be dead all the same. He leaned down and picked up my shoe.He waggled the gun. “Come on. I don’t want to hurt you. This is almost over. Wrong time to cut and run when we’re down to the wire.”I eased my way down, feeling for each rung with my foot, suddenly fearful of heights. I considered letting go, plunging down on top of him, but I’d only hurt myself and there was no guarantee I’d do him any harm at all. He watched me patiently until I reached the bottom. He probably preferred keeping his eyes on me to looking at Marty. He hadn’t seemed to register the fact that the body hadn’t been removed.He smiled slightly. “Good try. You had me goin’ there. I thought you ran the other way...” He handed me my shoe. I paused, leaning against the wall while I pulled the shoe on.He took my elbow and urged me through the service elevator to the corridor. He was right. It was almost over so what was the point of risking my neck. In the end, this had nothing to do with me. I hunkered, taking my time while I tied my shoelaces. Beck was getting short on patience, but I didn’t like to walk with laces flapping loose. He took me by the elbow again and steered me around the comer to the public elevators. He’d left his briefcase in the hall. He picked it up and used the knuckle of his index finger to push the call button. The elevator must have been sitting right there because the doors opened instantly. The two of us got on. Beck pressed the button for the lobby. Like strangers, we stood silently against the back wall, eyes on the digital readout while the floor numbers dropped from 4 to 3 to 2 to the lobby. I had one brief hope that when the doors opened, I’d see cops, guns drawn, ready to arrest him and put an end to this.The lobby was empty except for Willard, sitting at his desk. The fountain in the center of the lobby was gushing like a toilet. My bladder was so full I could have drawn a diagram of its shape and size. Outside the plate-glass windows, the walkway was dark, not a soul in sight. The stores across the way were shut down tight. Willard was on his feet, his attention focused on his bank of ten monitors. He held an arm out and snapped his fingers rapidly. Beck and I crossed the lobby and rounded the end of Willard’s desk. He pointed. The image on one of the black-and-white screens showed the underground parking lot. Reba, driving my VW, nosed down the ramp and turned right. The car passed from our view. Three minutes later, we saw her enter the service corridor, one floor below. She was using two hands to haul the duffel, which was clearly heavy. She eased it down on the floor and looked up at the corner-mounted security camera. “Hey, Beck?” Her cheek was swollen from the blow she’d taken, lips puffy, one eye black. Her nose looked as though it had been flattened across the bridge.She waited, looking up at us.Willard handed Beck the handset from the phone on his desk. He pressed a button and we could hear the wall phone ring in the service corridor. Reba picked up, her gaze fixed on the camera.Beck said, “Hey, baby. How’s by you?” Mocking her earlier greeting.“Knock it off, Beck. You want this or not?”“Show me first.”She dropped the handset and it banged against the wall, bouncing on its spiral cord. Beck jerked his head back, murmuring “Shit.” Below, Reba leaned over and opened the duffel bag. The computer was clearly visible.“And the floppy disks?”She opened a side pocket and extracted a handful of disks, probably twenty by the look. She held them toward the camera, holding them face forward so he could read the sequence of dates he’d probably written himself. “Okay. Good enough,” he said.She slipped them back inside and zipped the duffel shut. “Happy now, you asshole?”“I am. Thanks for asking. Come on up to the lobby and behave yourself. I’ve got Kinsey right here in case you want to get cute about this.”Reba flipped him the bird. Attagirl, I thought. That would show him.I glanced at Willard. “You just going to stand there?”No response. Maybe Willard had died and no one had remembered to mention it. I wanted to wave a hand in front of his: to see if he would blink.The service elevator reached the lobby level and the doors slid open. Reba stepped forward, struggling with the weight of the duffel. Beck, gun in hand, watched her for any hint of rebellion or treachery.She set the duffel on the floor in front of him. He motioned with the gun. “Open it.”“Oh, geez. You think it’s booby-trapped?”“I wouldn’t put it past you.”She leaned down and unzipped the duffel, exposing the computer for the second time. Without his having to ask, she took out the floppy disks and handed them to him.“Now step back.”She backed up about ten feet, her hands in the air. “So worried,” she remarked.Beck passed the gun to Willard. “Keep an eye on both.”He knelt and freed the computer case from the duffel. He reached in his coat pocket and took out a small Phillips-head screwdriver, which he used to loosen the screws that held the housing in place. He tossed the screws aside and then took off the back panel. I couldn’t figure out what he was up to.The inner workings of the computer were now exposed. I don’t own, a computer and I’d never seen the inside of one. What a complex assortment of multicolored connectors, wires, circuits, transistors, or whatever they were called, lots of weensy things at any rate. Willard held the gun steady, barrel pointing first at Reba and then at me, but almost idly I thought. Beck opened his briefcase and took out a glass beaker with a glass stopper wedged in the top. He opened it and dolloped a clear liquid across the circuits like salad dressing. It must have been acid because a hissing went up and the smell of chemical burning filled the air. Insulated wires dissolved, small parts curling as though alive, shriveling and shrinking as the caustic liquid made contact. He took out a second beaker and poured acid over the floppy disks, spreading them out so as not to miss any. Holes appeared instantly, and a sizzling smoke developed as the disks disintegrated.Reba said, “You won’t remember all that stuff.”“Don’t worry about it. I have dupes in Panama.”“Well, goody for you.” Her voice sounded odd.I glanced at her. Her mouth had begun to tremble and tears glistened in her eyes as she watched. Hoarsely, she said, “I really loved you. I did. You were everything to me.”I found myself staring at her with interest. Why did I think she was faking?“Geez, Reeb, you never learn, do you. What’s it going to take to get it through that thick head of yours? You’re just like a kid. Someone tells you there’s a Santa Claus and you believe.”“But you said I could trust you. You said you loved me and you’d take care of me. You said that.”“I know, but I lied.”“About everything?”“Pretty much,” he said, ruefully.I caught a glimpse of motion on one of the monitors. In the underground garage, two Santa Teresa black-and-whites were coming down the ramp. Two unmarked cars followed.Meanwhile, Beck was intent on his task. He took the screwdriver and jammed it into the workings of the computer, twisting metal parts, snapping wires, careful to avoid any direct contact between the acid and his hands. He had his back to the big plate-glass windows so he didn’t see Cheney step out of the shadows with his gun drawn. Vince Turner appeared along with four agents in FBI vests.Too late to salvage the data, but I was grateful nonetheless.Reba caught sight of them. I saw her gaze flick to the window and back to Beck. “Oh, poor Beck. You are so screwed,” she said.He stood up and reached for his briefcase. He looked at her, his expression pleasant. “Really? How do you figure that?”Reba was silent for a beat, a slow smile lighting her battered face. “The minute I got back to town, I put in a call to a man who works for the IRS. I spilled the beans, spelled it all out-names, numbers, dates-everything he needed to get his warrants. He had to call the judge at home, but he was happy to be of help.”Facetiously, Beck said, “Oh, Jesus, Reba, get a grip. I’ve known for months they were on to me. This is the only thing I was really worried about and now it’s taken care of. How much incriminating data you think they’ll salvage from this mess?”“Probably none.”“That’s right. Thank you very much.”Beck saw Reba’s attention shift. He looked over his shoulder and spotted Cheney, Vince Turner, and assorted cops and federal agents lined up on the walk. His smile might have faltered, but he didn’t seem concerned. He signaled to Willard to let them in. Willard set the gun on the floor, raised his hands to show he had no weapons, and used his jumble of keys to unlock the doors.Reba wasn’t finished. “Only one problem.”Beck turned back to her. “Which is?”“That’s not Marty’s.”Beck laughed. “You’re full of crap.”Reba shook her head. “Nope. Not so. The feds didn’t like the fact the computer had been stolen so I swapped it back.”“How’d you get into the building?”“He let me in,” she said, indicating Willard.“Give it up, baby. The man works for me.”“Maybe so but I’m the one who’s been screwing his brains out. We’re just like this.” She raised her left hand and made a circle with the thumb and index finger. She stuck her right index finger in the hole and pumped it like a piston. Beck winced at the crudity, but Reba laughed.I shot a quick look at Willard, who dropped his gaze with appropriate modesty. Cops and FBI agents were crowding into the lobby. Cheney picked up Beck’s gun and flicked the safety before he handed it to Vince.Reba was saying, “After Willie let me in, I took Marty’s computer up to your office. I disconnected your computer, pulled it out, and put Marty’s in its place. Then I put your computer under Marty’s desk. That one’s Onni’s. Nothing much on it but personal correspondence and a bunch of stupid computer games. I can’t believe you paid her so well when all she did was waste time.”Beck still wasn’t buying it. He shook his head, sliding his tongue across his front teeth while trying to suppress a smile. She might as well have been telling him she’d been abducted by aliens for use in sexual experiments.She said, “Want to know what else I did? I’m tellin’ you, Beck, I’ve been a busy little girl. After I swapped computers, I drove over to Salustio’s and paid him the twenty-five grand I stole. Marty gave me the cash in exchange for documents he never got to use. Truth is, Salustio didn’t give a damn where the money came from. Problem is, I pay him and he’s still pissed at me. So I figure to compensate him for the inconvenience, I’d warn him about the raid. That gave him just enough time to get his money out of here. So now all’s forgiven. He and I are square. You’re the one who’s left standing out in the cold.”Beck’s expression was opaque. He was never going to give her the satisfaction of ceding the win, but she knew it was hers.
