---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "R Is for Ricochet - index_split_022.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - R Is for Ricochet"
tags: ["elevator", "said", "door", "one", "reba", "know", "get", "like", "could", "come", "hand", "willard", "right", "wall", "service", "room", "think", "open", "made", "key", "back", "code", "long", "u", "took"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/RIsforRicochet-indexsplit022html

---


Unknown
Chapter 21We retraced our steps, emerging from the service corridor in the parking garage near Macy’s. We crossed to the escalator and went up one level to the esplanade. When we reached the front entrance to the Beckwith Building, Reba pushed the door and discovered that it was locked. She cupped her hands to the plate glass. “Hey, Willie. Over here.”She tapped on the glass to get the security guard’s attention. The minute he looked up, she gave him an enthusiastic wave and pantomimed his unlocking of the door. Willard shook her off, like a pitcher shaking off a sign. Reba motioned him over with an exaggerated rolling of her arm. He stared at her, unmoved, and she clasped her hands together earnestly as though in prayer. Reluctantly he left his perch at the desk and crossed to the door, where he said, “Building’s closed!” from his side of the glass.“Come onnn. Open up,” she said.He considered the request, his ambivalence clearly evident. I She put her mouth against the glass and made a big sucky kiss. She gave him the big eyes and produced the dimples for effect. “Please, please, please?”He wasn’t happy, but he did pick up the keys attached to the chain on his belt. He unlocked the door and opened it a cautious three inches. “What do you want? I can’t be doing this unless you’re one of the tenants.”“I know, but Kinsey left her bag upstairs and she needs her car I keys and wallet.”Unimpressed, Willard flicked a look at me. “She can come back on Monday. Building opens at seven.”“How’s she going to do that? Without her car keys, she can’t even drive. I had to pick her up at her house and bring her over here myself. This is her handbag, Will. Do you know what it’s like when a woman’s separated from her purse? She’s going berserk. She’s a private detective. She has her license in there. Plus her address book, makeup, credit cards, checkbook, every nickel she owns. Even her birth control pills. She gets pregnant, the burden’s on you, so get ready to raise a kid.”“Okay, okay. Tell me where it is and I’ll bring it down to her.”“She doesn’t know where it is. That’s the point. All she knows is she had it when we went up with Marty last night. Now it’s gone and that’s the only place she went. It has to be there somewhere. Come on. Be a peach. It won’t take five minutes and we’ll be out of your hair.”“Can’t. The alarm system’s on.”“Marty gave me the code. Honest. He said it’s fine with him as long as we cleared it with you first.”The long-suffering Willard opened the door and allowed us in. I thought he’d insist on coming upstairs with us, but he was serious about his monitoring duties and didn’t want to leave his post. Reba and I took one of the two public elevators, which made the four-floor journey at an agonizingly slow pace.“You sure you know the code?” I asked.“I watched Marty do it. Same code we had before when I was working for Beck.” “How come he’s such a nut about security and so careless about his codes? Sounds like anybody who ever worked for him could get in.”Reba waved the observation away. “We used to change ’em all the time-once a month-but with twenty-five employees, somebody was always messing up. The alarm would go off three and four times a week. The cops came out so many times, they started charging fifty bucks a pop.”The doors slid open and Reba hit the Stop Run button while she stepped out of the elevator. I leaned around and watched as she punched in the seven-digit code: 4-19-1949. “Beck’s birthday,” she said. “For a while he used Tracy’s, but he was the one who kept forgetting that date so he switched to his own.”The status light on the keypad shifted from red to green. She left the elevator on Stop Run, awaiting our return. I followed her into the reception area.The offices were dead quiet. There were numerous lights on, which oddly contributed to the overall feeling of abandonment. “Bart and Bret, the cleaning twins, were in last night. Check the vacuum cleaner tracks. We better hope whoever comes in here first thing Monday morning doesn’t wonder about our footprints running up and down the halls.”“How do you know the vacuuming was done by Bart and Bret and not the guys with the cleaning cart?”“I’m so glad you asked. Because I’ll tell you why. They weren’t real cleaning guys, which is something I figured out in the dead of night. Know what bugged me about them?” She paused for effect. “Wrong shoes. What guy mops the floors wearing four-hundred-dollar shiny Italian loafers?”“You are Sherlock Holmes.”“You’re damn straight. You grab your shoulder bag while I satisfy my curiosity. This shouldn’t take long.”I made a beeline for the roof, heading down the corridor closest to the stairs. Given Beck’s edict about clean surfaces, every desk I spotted en route looked as barren and untouched as an ad for office furniture. I took the steps two at a time and pushed through the big glass door that opened onto the roof. The morning sky was immense, the perfect shade of blue. I slowed and crossed to the parapet, drawn by a desire to see downtown Santa Teresa from this vantage point. The sun had warmed the air in the rooftop garden, coaxing fragrance from the flowering shrubs while a light breeze rustled through the foliage. In the distance, light spilled like pancake syrup across the mountain peaks. I leaned over and looked at the street, which was largely empty at this hour. I tilted my face to the light and took a deep breath before I righted myself and turned back to the task at hand. I retrieved my bag from behind the big potted ficus tree and went downstairs. Reba had been right about my birth control pills. I pulled out my packet and popped two like after-dinner mints.When I got downstairs, she’d taken out a tape measure and was busy checking the length and breadth of the corridor, one foot on the metal ribbon while she extended the tape to the full. She released the button and I could hear the metal tape sing as she brought it zinging back to her hand. The tip-end whipped against her finger and dealt her a nasty blow. “Shit. Son of a bitch!” She sucked on her knuckle.“You need a medic?”“Look at that. I’m bleeding to death.”The nick on her index finger was a quarter of an inch long and she studied it with a frown. “Anyway, bet you dollars to donuts the friggin’ room is right there. Press your ear to the wall and see if you can hear anything. Minute ago I heard a humming. Like machinery.”“Reba, that’s the elevator shaft. You probably caught the sound of the service elevator going down.”“Not from this floor. We’re the only ones up here.”“But we can’t be the only people in the building. The elevator equipment is right above us. Of course you’d hear it.”“You think?”“Let’s try the obvious and check it out,” I said.She followed me around the comer where the service elevator was located. From the digital readout on the wall, we could track the car going down, the number changing from 1 to G.“Told you,” I said, and then glanced at my watch. “Shit. We better get out of here before Willard gets anxious and comes looking for us. I can’t believe the nonsense you laid on him. Talk about maneuvering.”“I thought I did great... though that begging and pleading shit is only good for limited use. The next time we want in, I’ll have to screw the guy for sure.”“You’re making a joke, right?”“Don’t be such a prude. Screw one guy, you’ve screwed ’em all. You’re only a virgin once, and after that, you might as well reap the benefits. Besides, I wouldn’t mind. I think he’s cute.” Her gaze was raking the wall again and I could tell she was still speculating about the missing space. She said, “Maybe you get in by way of the roof. Through that little building that looks like a gardener’s shack.”“Skip it. We don’t have time. Let’s get out of here.”“You’re such a worrywart,” she said, taking out Onni’s key ring. “Just give me a second to return these, okay? I’m trying to be a good citizen.”“What about Beck’s phony docs.”“Right. I got ’em right here,” she said, patting her jacket pocket. She took the hem of her shirt and began cleaning fingerprints from the keys. “Wiping off the prints,” she said. “In case they ever dust.”“Just get on with it.”She walked down the hall to Onni’s office-not nearly fast enough for my taste-and disappeared from sight. I checked my watch again. We’d been up here twelve minutes. How long was it supposed to take us to find my shoulder bag? By now Willard would be out from behind his desk and on his way up. Reba took her time returning and when she finally appeared, hands shoved in her jacket pockets, instead of getting on the elevator as anticipated, she returned to the alcove where the service elevator was located and stood there staring at it.“What are you doing?”“I just figured it out. Hot damn.” She reached out and pressed the button, calling the service elevator to the fourth floor. As we watched the digital readout, the elevator began its slow and dutiful climb. Eventually the doors opened. She reached in and pressed Stop Run, then entered the service elevator with me close behind her. The space was twice the width and half again as long as an ordinary elevator, apparently to accommodate moving boxes, file cabinets, and oversize office equipment. The walls were hung with quilted gray fabric like the blankets movers use to protect furniture.Reba moved to the wall opposite the elevator doors and pulled the padding aside to reveal a second set of elevator doors. On a wall-mounted panel to the right of them, there was a nine-digit keypad. She studied it for a moment and then raised a tentative hand.“You know the code?”“Maybe. I’ll tell you in a minute.”“Guess wrong and won’t you set off the alarm?”“Oh, come on. It’s like a fairy tale-you get three tries before the thing goes berserk. If I blow it, we’ll tell Willie we made a wee mistake.”“Just leave it for now. You’re really pushing your luck.”She ignored me, of course. “I know it’s not going to be his birth date-even Beck wouldn’t be dumb enough to use that again. But it might be a variation. He’s a narcissist. Everything he does relates to him.”“Reba...She flashed a look at me. “If you’d quit whining and help me out we can get on with it and be on our way. I can’t pass this up. It may be the only chance we have.”I rolled my eyes, trying to control my panic, which was already accelerating. She wasn’t going to budge until we figured it out or got caught. I said, “Shit. Try the same date backwards.”“Not bad. I like it. That’d be what?”“9-4-9-1-9-1-4.”She thought about it briefly and then made a face. “Don’t think so. Too tough for him to rattle the number off the top of his head. Let’s try this...”She punched in 1949-19-4. No deal.She punched in 19-4-1949.I could feel my heart thud. “That’s two.”“Would you get off it? I know it’s two. I’m the one punching in numbers. Let’s just think about it for a second. What’s another possibility?”“What about Onni’s birthday?”“Let’s hope not. I know it’s November 11, but I’m not sure what year. Anyway, Beck hasn’t been boffing her long so he probably doesn’t have a clue himself.”I said, “11-11 any year would be eight digits, not seven.”She pointed at me, apparently impressed with my ability to count. “What’s his wife’s birthday?” I asked.“3-17-1952. But he’s blown that one so many times he’s probably spooked by now. Besides, he prefers numbers with internal connections or sequences. Know what I mean? Repeats or patterns.”“I thought you said he used your birthday at one point.”“True. That’d be 5-15-1955.”“Hey, mine’s 5-5-1950,” I chirped, sounding like a lunatic.“Great. We’ll do a joint celebration when the dates roll around next year. So what should I try? His birth date backwards or mine straight ahead?”“Well, his birth date backwards has an internal logic if you group the numbers. 949-191-4. Would he break it down that way?”“Might.”“Just do one or the other before I have a heart attack.” She punched in 5-15-1955. A moment of silence and then the doors slid open. “My birthday. Sweet. You think he still cares?”I pushed the Stop Run button and watched her wipe her prints off the keypad, taking care not to trigger the alarm. “Wouldn’t want anyone to know we were here,” she said, happily.Meanwhile, I was staring straight ahead. The room was probably six feet by eight-not much bigger than a closet. The cleaning cart we’d seen was shoved up against the left wall. A U-shaped counter took up much of the remaining floor space. I looked up. The room seemed to be well ventilated, the walls heavily padded. A smoke detector and a heat detector had been Installed In the shadowy upper reaches of the ceiling, where I could see sprinkler heads as well. Rungs embedded in the wall formed a ladder that went straight up. Around the perimeter of the ceiling, I could see rectangles of daylight roughly corresponding to the vents in the fake gardener’s cottage on the roof. Reba was right. In a pinch, you could probably gain entry to the room from the roof. Or escape that way.There were three currency-counting machines on one arm of the counter and four currency-bundling machines on the adjacent counter. Open suitcases were lined up on the third section, packed with tightly wrapped bundles of hundred-dollar bills. Under the counter, ten cardboard cartons were lined up, their top flaps open, packed with additional bundles of hundreds, fifties, and twenties in U.S. currency. Each bundle was shrink-wrapped, with paper adding-machine tape circling packets of five. There were two styrofoam coffee cups visible and a pile of empty cups in a wastebasket, which also contained wads of discarded plastic wrappers. Several silver-dollar-size plastic disks with small blades were being used to slit the wrappers.Reba said, “Geez. I’ve never seen so much money.”“Me neither. It looks like they’re pulling bundles from these boxes, removing the wrappers, running the bills through the currency counter, and then rewrapping them for transport.”She advanced a few steps and checked the total on one of the currency counters. “Take a peek at this puppy. They’ve run a million bucks through this.” She picked up a bundle and weighed it in her hand. “Wonder how much this is. Wouldn’t you love to know?” She sniffed it. “You’d think it would smell good, but it doesn’t smell like anything.”“Would you keep your hands to yourself?”“I’m just looking. I’m not doing anything. How much do you figure is in one of these, twenty grand? Fifty?”“I have no idea. Don’t mess with that. I’m serious.”“Aren’t you curious what it feels like? It doesn’t weigh all that much,” she said. She wiped her prints from the wrapper and put the bundle back, surveying the space. “How many guys you think work here besides the two we saw?”“There’s not room for three. They probably come in weekends when the activity’s less conspicuous,” I said. I reached out and put my hand on one of the styrofoam cups and nearly moaned in fear. “This is still warm. Suppose they come back?”“No one can get to us. The elevator’s on hold.”“But if they find the elevator on hold, won’t they know something’s wrong? We have to get out of here. I’m begging you.”“Okay, okay. But I knew I was right about the room. This is incredible, isn’t it?”“Absolutely. Who gives a shit? Let’s go.”I backed out of the room and into the service elevator. The other set of doors was still open and I stuck my head out into the corridor to assure myself that no one had entered the premises while we were in the room. Reba was having trouble dragging herself away. I said, “Reba, come on!” sounding every bit as tense and impatient as I felt.She moved into the elevator as though mesmerized and entered the seven-digit code. The doors on that side of the elevator slid closed.She replaced the wall padding and adjusted the quilted matting to conceal the second set of doors.? What took you so long?”“It’s all so beautiful. Can you imagine having even half the bundles in there? You’d never have to lift another finger as long as you lived.”“No problem. Your life wouldn’t last that long.”We exited through the elevator doors that opened into Beck’s offices and Reba released the Stop Run button. We waited until the service elevator doors closed, and then went around the corner and got back on the public elevator.She released the hold button, the doors closed, and we began our leisurely descent. I was nearly sick with anxiety, but she didn’t seem affected. The woman had nerves of steel.When we reached the lobby level and stepped off, Willard looked up from his desk with a smile. “You find it?”I held up my shoulder bag to show our mission had been accomplished. My hands were shaking so badly I thought he’d spot the trembling from across the lobby. I was doing what I could to maintain a semblance of normality until we could ease out the front door and be on our way.Reba, true to form, made a point of crossing to his desk, where she stretched up on tiptoe and rested her arms on the counter, holding her injured finger close to his face. “You got a first-aid kit? Look at this. I about crippled myself.”Willard peered at her knuckle, inspecting the wound that was no bigger than a hyphen. “How’d you do that?”“I must have snagged it on something. Sucker hurts. You can kiss it and make it better if you want.”He shook his head, smiling indulgently, and started opening his desk drawers. While he rummaged around in search of a Band-Aid, I noticed Reba’s gaze flicking across the monitors, taking in all ten views.Willard held up a bandage. “Think you can manage this yourself?”“Don’t be mean. After all I’ve done for you?” She held out her finger and he pulled the red thread that opened the paper packaging. He removed the Band-Aid and applied it.She said, “Thanks. You’re a doll. I’ll recommend a raise.” She made a kissing noise at him as we headed for the door.Behind us, Willard left his perch and followed, taking out his jumble of keys so he could unlock the front door. “Don’t you be coming back. This is the last of it.”“I won’t, but you’ll miss me,” she said as we scooted through the door.“I doubt that,” he said, and Reba blew him another kiss. I thought she was laying it on a bit thick, but Willard didn’t seem to mind. He turned the keys in the lock and we were safe.
