---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "R Is for Ricochet - index_split_009.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - R Is for Ricochet"
tags: ["like", "know", "said", "back", "got", "reba", "car", "never", "way", "want", "head", "time", "take", "two", "year", "good", "would", "big", "could", "oh", "father", "love", "put", "well", "get"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/RIsforRicochet-indexsplit009html

---


Unknown
Chapter 8The gates to the Lafferty estate were open, and when I cruised up the drive, I saw Reba waiting on the porch step, the cat at her feet. She had a brush in her hand and she groomed the cat while he strutted back and forth, arching his back against the bristles. When she caught sight of me, she kissed him and set the brush aside. She crossed to the front door, opened the screen, and leaned in to tell her father or the housekeeper she was on her way out. I couldn’t help but smile as she bounded down the walk. She was happy, in high spirits, and I remember thinking, That’s what sex will do for you, kid. She” wore desert boots, jeans, and a nubby dark blue sweater with a large cowl neck. She looked as giddy as a young girl. Her father had said she was difficult-“reckless” was his word-but I’d seen no hint of it in my dealings with her. She possessed a natural exuberance and it was hard to picture her drunk or stoned. She opened the car door and slid onto the passenger seat, smiling and out of breath.“What’s the cat’s name?”“Rags. He’s a love. Seventeen years old and he weighs in at eighteen pounds. The vet wants him on a diet, but pooh on that.” She put her head back. “You don’t know how good it feels to be out. Like coming back from the dead.”I pulled away from the house, shifting gears as I headed down the drive and through the gates. “Did you sleep well?”“I did. Talk about a treat. Prison mattresses are about this thick, like lawn-chair pads, and all the sheets are gross. The pillow was so flat I had to roll it up and wad it under my head like a towel. I’d get in bed at night and my body heat would activate this strange smell in the bedding.” She wrinkled her nose.“What about the food?”“Not too bad. I’d say the food ranged from passable to gross. What saved us was they let us have these electric coils in our cells. You know the ones you use to heat up a single cup of tea? We figured out all kinds of things to make with ours-Top Ramen, soups, stewed tomatoes in a can. I never even liked stewed tomatoes until I got down there. Some days, the cells stank; scorched coffee or bean sludge crusted on the bottom of the pan. Most of the time I disconnected and blocked everything out. I created this invisible force field that I kept between me and the rest of the world. Otherwise, I’d’ve gone bonkers.”“Did you have friends?”“A couple and that helped. My best friend was Misty Raine, with an e on the end. She’s a stripper-big surprise with a name like that-but she’s an absolute hoot. Before California, she lived in Vegas, but after she was released and got off parole, she moved to Reno. She says the action there is better than Vegas. She’s been good about keeping in touch. God, I miss her.”“What was she in for?”“She had a boyfriend who taught her how to lift credit cards and forge checks ‘hanging paper’ as they say. They’d go on these big spending sprees, stay in a bunch of fancy hotels, and charge anything they liked. Then they’d dump that card, steal another one, and mosey on down the road. Then they branched out into phony IDs. She has this artistic streak and it turns out she’s a whiz at replicating passports and driver’s licenses and shit like that. They made so much dough she bought herself a new set of tits. Before the boyfriend, she’d been working for one of those mobile-maid-type cleaning services for minimum wage. She said she’d’ve never gotten anywhere on what she made even if she worked all her life.“My other friend, Vivian, was mixed up with this drug dealer. You don’t know how many times I heard that one. He was pulling in a thousand bucks a day, and they lived like kings until the cops showed up. That was her first offense and she swears it’s her last. She’s got another six months to serve and then I’m hoping she’ll come here. Her boyfriend’s been sent up five times and he’ll be in for years, which is just as well. She’s still crazy about the guy.”“True love is like that.”“You really think?”“No. That was meant to be tongue in cheek,” I said. “I take it you don’t have friends here in town.”“Just Onni, the woman I used to work with. I talked to her earlier, hoping I could see her this afternoon, but she was tied up.”“Isn’t she the one who took your old job?”“Right. She feels guilty about that, but I said don’t be dumb. She used to do front desk, but this was an opportunity she couldn’t pass up. Why would I begrudge her the chance? She said she’d have driven me around today if she didn’t have to work.”I turned into the parking lot of the Department of Motor Vehicles. “If you want, you can run in and pick up a booklet and study in the car before you take the test.”“Nah. I’ve been driving for years so how hard can it be?”“Well, it’s your choice. I prefer to bone up myself. Cuts the flop sweat.”“I like anxiety. It keeps me awake.”I waited in the car while Reba went in. She was gone forty minutes, some portion of which I spent hanging over the seat, trying to tidy all the crap that I keep back there. I generally motor around town with an overnight case stocked with toiletries and clean underpants. This, in the event I’m presented with a pressing reason to hop on a plane. In addition, I have assorted articles of clothing that I sometimes wear while pretending to be a public servant. I can do a pretty good imitation of a postal employee or meter reader from the gas-and-electric company. It pays to look like I’m doing official business when I’m standing on a front porch, idly scanning someone’s mail. I also keep several reference books in the backseat-one on crime scene investigation, Deering’s California Penal Code, a Spanish-language dictionary left over from a class I took years ago-an empty soda can, a bottle opener, an old pair of running shoes, a pair of badly snagged panty hose, and a lightweight jacket. While my apartment is tidy, I’m a slob when it comes to my car.I glanced up in time to catch Reba’s emergence from the DMV office. She half-skipped across the lot, waving a piece of paper that turned out to be her temporary license. “Aced it,” she said, as she got into the car.“Good for you,” I said. I turned the key in the ignition, shifted into reverse, and backed out of the space. “Where now?”“I know it’s only ten forty-five, but I wouldn’t object to another QP with Cheese.”We ordered from the drive-through window, found a space in the parking lot, and ate in the car. We’d opted for two large Cokes, two Quarter Pounders apiece, and a large order of fries, which we doused in ketchup and ate as fast as we could. I said, “I had a friend regained his health eating shit like this.”“I’m not surprised. I like how flat the pickles are, all mooshed in there. Pop’s got a personal chef who’s really great, but she’s never been able to duplicate this. I can’t figure it out, how they do it. Doesn’t matter where you are, a QP with Cheese tastes exactly the same and so does everything else. Big Macs, fries.”“Nice to have something you can count on,” I said.After lunch we drove out to the La Cuesta shopping mall, where Reba worked her way from store to store, flashing her father’s credit card and trying on clothes. Like other women I’ve known, she seemed to have an inborn sense of what would look good on her. In most stores, I made a point of finding the nearest chair from which I watched her like a good mom while she moved from rack to rack. Sometimes she’d take out a garment, study it critically, and put it back. Other times, she’d lay the item on top of those she’d draped over her arm. At intervals, she’d head off to the dressing room and then appear twenty minutes later with her choices made. Some pieces she’d leave behind and the rest she’d pile on the counter while she looked for something else. In the course of two hours, she bought pants, skirts, jackets, underwear, knit tops, two dresses, and six pairs of shoes.Once in the car again, she put her head back against the seat and closed her eyes. “I used to take so many things for granted, but never again. Where next?”“Up to you. Where do you want to go?”“The beach. Let’s take our shoes off and walk in the sand.”We ended up at Ludlow Beach, not far from my house. Santa Teresa City College was perched on the bluffs above us. The sky was gray as far as the eye could see, and wind was whipping the waves, blowing spray toward the beach. We left our shoes locked in the car, along with my shoulder bag and Reba’s purchases. The picnic tables in the grassy area had been abandoned except for a foursome of gulls squabbling over a bread bag that had been tied shut and left on the edge of a trash bin. Reba picked up the bag, tore through the cellophane, and tossed the crumbs across the grass. Gulls began to wheel in, shrieking, from all directions.We trudged through a hundred yards of soft sand between the parking lot and the surf. At the water line, icy waves tumbled perilously close to our bare feet, but the sand was damp and packed hard, easier to walk on. I said, “So what s the deal with Beck?”She flashed me a smile. “That blew me away, running into him like that.”“Really. That’s odd. I was under the impression you’d arranged it in advance.”She laughed. “No, not at all. Why would I do that?”“Reba.” I got the big brown eyes turned on me.“Honest. He’s the last person in the world I expected to see.”I shook my head. “Nope. Not honest. Lying through your teeth. That’s why you sat on the far side of the booth so you could watch for him.”“That’s not true. I had no idea he’d be there. I was totally surprised.”“Wait, wait, wait. Just hold on a second and I’ll bring you up to speed. I’ve been telling lies for years and believe me, I know when someone’s maneuvering the truth. I got a bullshit meter working ‘round the clock. I watched the two of you last night and it was ding ding ding! I was strictly window dressing, the person, in the olden days, they referred to as a ’beard.’ You called him from the parole office and told him where you’d be.”She was quiet for a moment. “Maybe. But I wasn’t sure he’d come.”“Oh, he came all right, if his behavior in the car was any indication.”Her head whipped around and she looked at me in disbelief. “You were spying on us?”“That’s what I’m paid for. You don’t want to be seen, you shouldn’t do it in public.”“What a bitch!”“Reba, your father cares about your welfare. He doesn’t want you to end up in the shit again.”She clutched my arm, looking at me earnestly. “Don’t tell Pop. Please. What purpose would it serve?”“I haven’t decided what I’m going to do. It might help if you told me what’s going on.”“I don’t want to talk about it.”“Oh, give it a whirl. You want me to keep quiet, you better fill me in.” I could see how tempted she was. Who can resist talking about a guy that you’re so smitten with?“I’m not sure how to explain. I worked for him for years and he’s always been supportive...”“Not the long version, dearie, just the salient points. You’re having an affair, right?”“It’s much more than that. I’m crazy about him and he’s crazy about me, too.”“The crazy part I’ll buy. Since when?”“Two years. Well, four if you count the two I was gone. We’ve been writing back and forth and talking on the phone. We planned to get together tonight, but there’s an AA meeting I’m supposed to attend. I thought I better show up in case Holloway checks. Beck called me at Pop’s and said he couldn’t stand the wait. I thought of Rosie’s because her place is so out of the way I couldn’t imagine running into anyone we know. I guess I should have told you up front, but I wasn’t sure you’d approve so I just went ahead and did it.”“What’d you need me for? You’re big boys and girls. Why not go to a motel and get it over with?”“I was scared. We haven’t been together for so long, I was afraid the chemistry might be gone.”“I don’t get it. What’s the timing on this? Were you bonking the guy while you were ripping him off?”“It isn’t ‘bonking.’ We make love.”“Oh, sorry. Were you ‘making love’ while you were making off with all his hard-earned cash?”“I guess you could put it that way. I mean, I knew it was wrong, but I couldn’t help myself. I felt awful. I still do. He knows I’d never do anything to hurt him.”“Losing that much money didn’t hurt? I’d be cut to the quick.”“It wasn’t personal. I took money from the company!”“Which he owns.”“I know, but I didn’t look at it that way. It was just there and nobody seemed to notice. I kept thinking I’d score big and then I’d put it all back. I never meant to keep it and I certainly wouldn’t steal.”“Reba, that’s what stealing is. You pocket someone else’s money without their knowledge or consent. If you use a gun, it’s called robbery. Either way, it’s not behavior that’s designed to endear.”She shrugged uncomfortably. “I saw it as a loan. It was just a temporary thing.”“The guy must have a big heart.”“He does. He tried to help me. He did everything he could. I know he’s forgiven me. He said it all again last night.”“Hey, I’ll take your word for it, but it’s weird. I mean, it’s one thing to forgive, but then to go on with the affair? How does he rationalize that? Doesn’t he feel used?”“He understands I have a self-destructive streak. That doesn’t mean he condones it, but he doesn’t hold it against me.”“Is that why you never went to trial? Because of him?”“Partly. When I got arrested, I knew I’d hit bottom. I was guilty as shit. I just wanted to take my licks and get it over with. A trial would’ve been an embarrassment for Pop. I didn’t want him to suffer another public spectacle. I’ve caused enough trouble as it is.”“Your father tells me Beck’s married. Doesn’t his wife figure into the equation somewhere?”“That’s a marriage of convenience. They haven’t been intimate for years.”“Oh, come on. Every married guy says that.”“I know, but in his case, it’s true.”“What a crock of shit. You think he’ll leave her for you? It doesn’t work that way.”“Wrong. You are so wrong,” she said. “He has it all set up.”“Like what?”“This is all part of his game plan, but he has to bide his time. If she finds out about me, she’ll take him for everything.”“I know I would.”“He told me last night he’s close to pulling it off.”“Pulling what off?”I got the double whammy-the big imploring eyes, plus the arm clutch denoting her earnest intent. “Promise you won’t tell.”“I can’t promise you that! What if he’s planning to rob a bank?”“Don’t be dumb. He’s getting his finances in shape. Once he has his assets under wraps, he’ll broach the subject of divorce. By then, it’ll be a done deal and what’s she going to do? She’ll just have to face facts and accept reality.”“Would you listen to yourself? You’re telling me he’s worked out a way to cheat his wife. What kind of man is he? First he runs around on her and then he rips her off? Oh wait. Skip that. Just occurred to me that you ripped him off first so maybe you’re the perfect pair.”“You don’t even know what love is. I bet you’ve never been in love in your life.”“Don’t change the subject.”“Well, it’s true, isn’t it?”I rolled my eyes, shaking my head in despair. “You are such a nincompoop.”“So what? It’s not hurting anyone.”“Oh, right. What about his wife?”“She’ll come around eventually, once it’s out in the open.”“Are there any kids?”“She never wanted kids.”“That’s a blessing at any rate. Look, babe. I know where you’re coming from. I was once involved with a married man myself. At the time they were separated, but they were married all the same. And you know what I learned? You have no idea what goes on between a husband and wife. I don’t care how he represents the relationship, you shouldn’t tread on sacred turf. It’s the same as walking on hot coals. Doesn’t matter how much faith you have, your feet are going to bum.”“Tough. It’s too late. It’s like playing craps. Once the dice leave your hand, you can’t do anything but watch.”“At least break it off until he’s free,” I said.“I can’t. I love him. He’s everything to me.”“Oh shit, Reba. Go see a shrink and get your head on straight.”I watched her face shut down. She turned abruptly and started walking away, addressing her comments to me over her shoulder as the gap between us widened. “You don’t have a clue what you’re talking about. You only met the man once so you can keep your friggin’ opinions to yourself. It’s none of your business and it’s none of Pop’s.” She walked on, heading toward the parking lot. I was left with no choice but to trot along behind.We barely spoke during the drive to her father’s house. By the time I dropped her off, I figured that was the end of the line for me. She was out of prison. She was home. She had her driver’s license back and a closet full of clothes. Nothing she’d done-namely, screwing-was in violation of her parole so her actions and behavior were no concern of mine.She got out of the car and retrieved her packages from the backseat. “I know you mean well and I appreciate your concern, but I’ve paid for my sins and now my life belongs to me. If I make bad choices, it’s my tough luck. It has nothing to do with you.”“Okay by me. Have a good life,” I said.She closed the car door. She paused and leaned in the window briefly. I thought she meant to say more, but she decided to let it ride. I watched her until the front door closed behind her and then I headed r for the office. Once there, I typed up an invoice, billing Nord Lafferty the five hundred dollars a day for the two days I’d worked. I put the bill in an envelope, which I sealed and addressed. On the way home, I drove past the post office, where I slowed to a stop and dropped it in the box at the curb.
