---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "R Is for Ricochet - index_split_024.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - R Is for Ricochet"
tags: ["said", "beck", "reba", "salustio", "know", "think", "one", "could", "tape", "take", "door", "call", "want", "vince", "got", "told", "say", "good", "shit", "put", "would", "hear", "cheney", "sure", "meeting"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/RIsforRicochet-indexsplit024html

---


Unknown
Chapter 23Tuesday morning passed in a great big boring blue. Given the egocentric nature of the world, I imagine that since nothing in particular was happening to me, there was nothing in particular happening to anyone else. In truth, events were transpiring that I would hear about only when it was too late to alter either cause or effect. My phone rang at 11:00-Cheney asking me to sit tight for the next half-hour as there was something he wanted me to hear. “You have a tape recorder?” he asked.“An old one, but it takes a regular-size cassette.”“That’ll do.”Fifteen minutes later he walked in the door. While I was waiting for him, I searched through my closet until I found the tape recorder. I opened a fresh package of AA batteries and by the time Cheney arrived, the tape recorder was set up and ready to go. “What is it?”He slipped the cassette in the machine. “Something the FBI picked up this morning. Some of it sounds garbled, but the techs have taken it as far as they can.” He pressed the Play button, triggering a generalized hissing and the ringing of a phone. A man on the other end picked up without identifying himself.” Yes?”The calling party said, “Problem.”The minute I heard the voice, I shot a look at Cheney. “Beck?”He pressed the Pause button. “The guy he’s talking to is Salustio Castillo. This was the first call he placed when he got to the office.” He pressed Play again.On the tape, Castillo was saying, “What?”“When I took delivery on that shipment, the inventory was off.”Silence. Hissing. “Impossible. ‘Off’ meaning what?”“Short.”“By how much?”“A pack.”“Large or small?”“Large. We’re talking twenty-five.”Salustio was silent. “I supervised the count myself. What about the invoices?”“Not a match. I checked three times and the numbers don’t tally.”Salustio said, “I told you I wanted someone supervising your end?”“This wasn’t on my end.”“Or so you say.”Silence from Beck. “You know I wouldn’t do this.”“Do I? You’ve argued for a bigger cut of the action, which I can’t... there’s no way I can justify from my end. Now you say... missing, all I have is your word.”“You think I’d lie?”“Let’s call it inventory shrinkage. It’s been known to happen. From my perspective, you’re adequately compensated... don’t see it that way. So maybe you siphon off a percentage of the goods and that satisfies your need for a pay increase. What better cover than claiming I shorted you?”“I never said that.”“Then what?”“I said the total’s off. Might be the... mistake...”“Yours. Not mine.”“... ““Fix it.”Silence. There was a stretch of pure hissing on the tape.Tightly Beck said, “Tell me what you want me to do and I’ll do it.”“Make up the shortfall out of your end, which is where the loss occurred. My total’s correct and I want full payment deposited to my account. In the meantime, not to worry. I know you’re good for it. Pleasure doing business,” Salustio said, and clicked off.Beck said, “Fuck!” as he banged down the phone.Cheney turned off the tape.I thought the conversation was interesting, but I wasn’t clear why he wanted me to hear it. I was on the verge of making a comment when Cheney said, “A tightly packed bundle of hundred-dollar bills is one inch thick,” he said. “That’s twenty-five thousand dollars. I know because I asked the Treasury boys. Beck’s been back a day. If a currency delivery came in while he was gone, it makes sense he’d double-check the totals first thing.”“Okay,” I said. And then I shut my mouth because I could hear the penny drop. He knew Reba and I had ventured into the counting room on Saturday when the currency was being unwrapped and run through the machines. All either of us had to do was clip a pack of hundreds and who’s be the wiser? Beck didn’t know we’d been there and all Salustio cared about was having the right total credited to his account. “You think she took it?”“Sure. Vince was apoplectic. I thought he’d pop a vein. Beck doesn’t know she was up there, but he’ll rip the place apart looking for that dough. Once he pulls the security tapes, he’s got her. You, too, for that matter.”“She has to be nuts. Why take the risk?”“Because Beck can’t report the loss. He calls the cops and he’ll generate the kind of scrutiny he can’t afford. Not when he’s on the verge of skipping out.”I could feel myself flush, overtaken by alternating surges of denial and guilt. I suddenly understood what she’d been doing in the counting room for those few beats after I’d entered the elevator. I’d felt anxious, impatient to be gone while she’d been smitten with the sight of all that cash. Meanwhile, I was preoccupied, intent on checking the corridor to make sure we were in the clear. It wouldn’t have taken any time-two seconds?-to stuff a packet of cash down her shirt or in her jacket pocket. I’d been thinking-nerves of steel,-amazed at her nonchalance while I was wetting my drawers. Then, of course, there was her exuberance with Willard once we got downstairs. She’d flirted and I’d assumed she was hyper because we’d discovered Beck’s counting room. Must have been the feel of all that money next to her skin. Crazy. Reba wiping down her fingerprints. Cheney verbally boxing my ears when I’d confessed our misdeeds. And I’d defended her. Shit! My palms were damp and I rubbed them against my jeans. “What now?”“Vince wants her in as soon as possible. The meeting with the IRS and Customs has been moved up to tomorrow afternoon at four in the FBI offices. Vince wants to talk to her first, like at one o’clock, and see if he can iron this out. Otherwise, the shit’s really going to hit the fan.”“Can’t he help her?”“Sure, if she’s willing to put herself in his hands.”“Fat chance. She’s never even met the man.”“Why don’t you talk to her?”“If you think it’d do any good. I’ve been ducking her for days, but I can give it a try.”“Do that. Worst-case scenario, he’ll put her in a safe house until he can figure out what’s what.”Cheney checked his watch, popped the Eject button on the tape recorder, and removed the tape. “I gotta get this back. You have Vince’s number?”“You better give it to me again.”He snagged a pen and a scratch pad and made a note, tearing off the top sheet, which he handed to me. “Let me know what she says. If you can’t reach me, you can talk directly to him.”“Will do.”After he left, I sat at my desk, trying to figure out what to say to Reba. There was really no point in pussyfooting around. She’d dug herself a hold and the sooner she climbed out of it, the better off she’d be. As long as Beck got the money back, he might no inquire too closely how it had disappeared. I picked up the handset and punched in the number for the Lafferty estate. I went through a preliminary round of conversation with the housekeeper, Freddy, who told me Reba was still in bed. “Shall I wake her?”“I think you better.”“One moment. I’ll put you on hold and have her take the call in her room.”“Great. Thanks.”I pictured Freddy in her crepe-soled shoes, padding down the hall an up the stairs, holding on to the rail. The silence went on for a bit, but I imagined her knocking on Reba’s door and then a groggy interval before she picked up, which was sure enough how she sounded when she came on the line. “‘Lo’”“Hi, Reeb. It’s Kinsey. I’m sorry to wake you.”“That’s okay. I should probably be getting up anyway. What d’you want?”“I need to ask you about something and you have to swear to tell the truth.”“Sure.” She was already sounding more alert, so I thought she had a fair idea what was coming.“Remember when we were together Saturday morning on that little voyage of discovery?”Silence.“Did you lift a packet of hundred-dollar bills?”Silence.“Never mind admitting it. The point is, Beck knows.”“So what? Serves him right. It’s like I told him at Bubbles, eh owes me, big time.”“Only one tiny problem. The money wasn’t his. It was Salustio’s.”“No.”“Yes.”“Shit. Are you sure? I thought it was Beck’s, like he was packing it to take with him when he left.”“Nuhn-uhn. He was verifying Salustio’s total before making a deposit to his account. Now he’s twenty-five grand short.”I could hear her lighting a cigarette. I said, “What made you think you could get away with it?”“It was a whim, like an impulse. Haven’t you ever done anything like that? Spur of the moment. I just did it, that’s all.”“Well, you better put it back before Beck figures it out.”“How’m I suppose to do that?”“How would I know? Stick it in an envelope and leave it at Willard’s desk. He can pass it on to Marty or take it up himself!”“But why do I have to do anything?” Beck can’t prove it, can he? I mean, how can he prove it when I didn’t leave fingerprints?”“For one thing, he’s got security tapes that show you going in and out of the building. Beyond that, he doesn’t have to prove a thing. All he has to do is tell Salustio and you’re screwed.”“He wouldn’t do that to me, would he? I mean, I know he’s a shit, but he wouldn’t tell Salustio. You think?”“Of course he would! Salustio expects him to cough up the missing twenty-five grand.”“Shit. Shit, shit, shit.”“Look, Reeb. I’ll say this again. Vince Turner can probably help if you’ll turn around and help him.”“What good does that do me with Salustio?”“Maybe Vince can put you somewhere safe until it’s all ironed out.”“Oh, man. This is bad. You think I should call Beck?”“You’d be smarter to keep away from him and talk t Vince instead. He wants to see you anyway before you meet with the feds.”“What feds? I don’t have a meeting with the feds. The guy dropped the ball.”“He did not. The meeting’s been changed to tomorrow afternoon at four. I’ll pick you up at twelve-thirty and you can spend a couple of hours with him first.”“About bloody time.”“I told you it would take time.”“Yeah, well, it’s too late now.”“Meaning what?”“Meaning, I gotta think how to handle this. I’ll call you back.” The line went dead.So much for my powers of persuasion.That night, Cheney was busy with softball practice, so I was on my own. I had dinner at Rosie’s, after which I retired to my apartment and spent the evening with a book.Twelve-fifteen on Wednesday, I headed south on the 101, relieved to be in motion again. Once I delivered Reba to Vince’s office, he could take charge of her and I’d be off the hook. The drive up Bella Sera was exactly as it had been on prior occasions, right down to the scent of bay laurel and the smell of dry grass. It had been thirteen days since I’d taken this route on my way to meet Nord Lafferty, wondering what he could possibly want with me. Escort his daughter home from prison. How complicated was that? In the days since we’d returned, her life had slowly come unraveled. The crazy part was that I liked her. Despite the differences between us, I responded to her out of the outrageous elements in my own nature. Watching her operate was like seeing a distorted version of myself, only larger than life and much more dangerous.When I reached the property, the gates were standing open. As I rounded the bend in the drive, I saw the same Lincoln Continental and Mercedes sedan. Now a third vehicle sat beside the other two-this one a Jaguar convertible, a handsome dark green with a caramel interior that looked good enough to eat. I parked, leaving my car unlocked as I moved up the walk to the house. Reba’s massive long-haired orange cat, Rags, sauntered out to greet me, looking at me with startling blue eyes. I extended my hand and he sniffed at my fingers. He allowed me to scratch his head, nudging me repeatedly to keep the action afloat.I rang the bell and waited while he circled my legs, leaving long orange hairs on the legs on my jeans. From inside, I heard the muffled tap of high heels on hard marble tile. The door was opened by a woman I immediately pegged as the legendary Lucinda. She appeared to be in her midforties, thanks to the work of a first-rate plastic surgeon. I knew this because her neck and hands were fifteen years older than her face. Her hair was short, streaked with varying shades of blond as through bleached by the sun. She was slim and beautifully dressed in a designer outfit I recognized, though I’d forgotten the name. The two-piece of black knit was banded in white and the jacket had brass buttons running down the front. The knee-length skirt revealed a knotty set of calves. “Yes?”“I’m Kinsey Millhone. Could you tell Reba I’m here?”She studied me carefully with eyes as dark as tar. “She’s not home. Is this something I can help you with?”“Ah, no. Don’t think so. I’ll just wait for her.”“You must be the private investigator Nord’s spoken of. I’m Lucinda Cunningham. I’m a friend of the family,” she said, extending her hand.“Nice meeting you,” I said, shaking hands with her. “Did Reba say when she’d be home?”“I’m afraid not. It might help if you told me what this was about.”Pushy woman, I thought. She has a meeting this afternoon. I told her I’d give her a lift.Her smile was not entirely warm, but she stepped out onto the porch and pulled the door shut behind her. “I don’t mean to pry, but this... um... appointment, is it important?”“Very. I called her myself to let her know.”“Well, this may present a problem. We haven’t seen Reba since dinnertime last evening.”“She was gone all night?”“And this morning as well. There’s been no note and no call. Her father hasn’t said as much, but I know he’s concerned. When I saw you at the door, I assumed you had news of her, though I was almost afraid to ask.”“That’s weird. I wonder where she went?”“We have no idea. As I understand it she was out late the night before. She slept until noon and then she had a phone call?”“That was probably me.”“Oh. Well, we wondered about that. She seemed upset afterwards. I believe she had a visitor. She was gone much of the afternoon and finally put in an appearance while her father was in the midst of his evening meal. He eats early most days, but this was closer to normal-shortly after six, I’d say. The cook had prepared chicken soup and his appetite seemed good. Reba wanted to chat with him and I decided to leave so the two could be alone.”“And she didn’t mention anything to him?”“He says not.”“I better talk to him myself. This is worrisome.”“I understand your concern, but he’s resting right now. He’s been working with is respiratory therapist and he’s exhausted. I’d prefer not to disturb him. Why don’t you come back later this afternoon? He should be up and about by four.”“I can’t do that. This meeting is urgent, and if she’s not going to make it, I need to know right now.”Her gaze dropped from mine and I could almost see her calculate the extent of her authority. “I’ll see if he’s awake and if he’s up to it. You’d have to keep it brief.”“Fine.”She reached behind and opened the door, gesturing me inside. I noticed she put a foot out to prevent the cat from coming in. Rags was offended, shooting her a look. I stepped into the foyer, waiting for directions.“This way.”She crossed toward the stairs and I followed in her wake. As she climbed the stairs, one hand trailing along the banister, she delivered a comment over her shoulder to me. “I’m not sure what Reba’s told you, but the two of us have never really gotten along.”“I wasn’t aware of that. I’m sorry to hear.”“I’m afraid there’s been a misunderstanding. She was under the impression I had designs on her father, which couldn’t be further from the truth. I don’t deny I’m protective. I’m also outspoken when it comes to her behavior. Nord seems to think if he’s ‘supportive’ and gives her everything she wants, eventually she’ll straighten out. He’s never understood what good parenting is about. Children have to take responsibility for what they’ve done. Only my opinion... not that anybody’s asked.”I let that one slide. I knew little of their history and didn’t feel a response would be appropriate.We traversed the wide landing, moving down a carpeted corridor with bedrooms on both sides. The door to the master bedroom was closed. Lucinda tapped softly, then opened the door and looked in on him. “Kinsey’s here about Reba. May is how her in?”I didn’t hear his response, but she stepped aside, allowing me to enter. “Five minutes,” she said firmly.
