---

author: ["Sue Grafton"]
title: "U Is for Undertow - index_split_003.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Sue Grafton - U Is for Undertow"
tags: ["penguin", "ltd", "book", "author", "group", "new", "division", "fiction", "canada", "pearson", "australia", "park", "unknown", "usa", "york", "avenue", "strand", "london", "ireland", "camberwell", "pty", "india", "zealand", "south", "office"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Adult, PI Solo]
url: /posts/suegrafton/UIsforUndertow-indexsplit003html

---


Unknown
A MARIAN WOOD BOOKPublished by G. P. Putnam’s SonsPublishers Since 1838a member of the Penguin GroupPenguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario M4P 2Y3, Canada (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, EnglandPenguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi-110 017, India Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South AfricaPenguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, EnglandCopyright © 2009 by Sue GraftonFirst published December 2009This  ePub edition v1.0 by Dead^Man Feb, 2011All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, scanned, or distributed in any printed or electronic form without permission. Please do not participate in or encourage piracy of copyrighted materials in violation of the author’s rights. Purchase only authorized editions.Published simultaneously in CanadaLibrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataGrafton, Sue.U is for undertow/Sue Grafton.p. cm.ISBN: 0-3991-5597-XeISBN: 978-1-101-15161-71. Millhone, Kinsey (Fictitious character) — Fiction. 2. Women private investigators — California — Fiction. 3. Girls — Crimes against — Fiction. I. Title.PS3557. R13U813’. 54 — dc22This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, businesses, companies, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers and Internet addresses at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors, or for changes that occur after publication. Further, the publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party websites or their content.http://us.penguingroup.comFor Larry Welch, who left us,steering a course for ports unknown,and for Pam, who sails on,navigating her journey over high seas.Safe passage to you both.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe author wishes to acknowledge the invaluable assistance of the following people: Steven Humphrey; Sam Eaton, Eaton and Jones, Attorneys at Law; John Mackall, Attorney at Law, Seed Mackall LLP; Bill Turner, Detective Sergeant (retired), Santa Barbara County Sheriff’s Department; Deborah Linden, Chief of Police, San Luis Obispo; Mary Ellen Tiffany, Vice President Business Development, Montecito Bank & Trust; Penny Braniff and Krys Jackson, Hope Ranch Park Homes Association; Special Agent Leane Blevins, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Ventura field office; Lisa Lowseth, DVM; Amy Taylor, Veterinary Technician, Cat Doctors; Susan Burke, Librarian, Laguna Blanca School; Diane Miller, Assistant Dean, Helen Bader School of Social Welfare, University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee; Kevin Frantz; Sally Giloth; Tracy Kanowsky; Suzanne Perkins; Steve Tipton; Kim Showalter; Jamie Clark; Susan Gulbransen; Joanna Barnes; and Sue Parks; along with a special thank-you to Margie and Keith Kirkendall, Patricia L. Erbe, M. D., and Jeffrey Grill, M. D., for the use of their names.
