---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0008.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["star", "planet", "one", "would", "time", "earth", "like", "light", "mass", "galaxy", "see", "thing", "might", "get", "much", "sun", "still", "life", "system", "since", "distance", "story", "magnitude", "world", "even"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0008html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 3
Astronomical Basics
To speculate intelligently about what kinds of life can arise on planets, you must first understand something about what kinds of planets can exist. Since we have firsthand knowledge of very few of them, and all of those are “siblings,” our speculations must be guided by what we think we understand about how planets form.
Planets, like people, are born, develop and die. So do stars, galaxies and the universe as a whole. In fact, all kinds of natural evolution can be considered stages of a single process on a grand scale. The primordial universe evolved into the one we know. As part of that process, galaxies were produced. Galaxy formation leads to the formation of stars. Stars (at least sometimes) produce planets as a by-product. As planets evolve, the process can sometimes go as far as the creation of life. And so on.
All this takes place on such a time scale that no human being has had a chance to observe it directly. So how do we know it happens? Well, we don't absolutely know exactly how it happens. What we have is a set of models—theoretical pictures of what seem the most likely mechanisms by which the universe we see could arise from the action of known physical laws. That picture has been built up over many years by many scientists collecting detailed observations of What's Out There and deducing from those observations and physical laws How It Probably Got That Way.
I.S. Shklovskii and Carl Sagan drew a delightful analogy (in Intelligent Life in the Universe) to show the task astronomers face. Imagine an alien making a brief visit to Earth, looking around at all the various shapes and sizes of human beings. He doesn't have time to see any human being change appreciably, but he wants to figure out how the various types are related, how they're produced, how they change with time (do big ones turn into little ones, or vice versa?) and what ultimately becomes of them. In other words, he wants to figure out the human life cycle, with no data except a quick look at a bunch of specimens in various stages of that cycle.
That's what astronomers, astrophysicists and cosmologists are up against. They get essentially static glimpses of a whole lot of stars, usually clumped into galaxies and sometimes accompanied by planets, and they would like to figure out how all those things evolve. They know that they must evolve, because every star is full of violent physical processes that cannot leave it unchanged. But how do they change? And how do we know?
In this book I will not have room to explain in detail how our current picture of the universe was built up. As a science fiction writer, you might not want to wade through that much background anyway. What you will need is a summary of what that current picture is—the current consensus of scientists about what principles govern the universe, and about how those principles operate to form the stellar menagerie we see (and inhabit). That is what I shall attempt to give.
However, even as a science fiction writer, you may find it worthwhile to explore the methodology of science in more detail, if only because you may find good story ideas there. Contrary to popular belief, science is not cut and dried, fixed and immutable. Our picture of the universe has been built up, however meticulously, by human beings with imperfect data that they've had to interpret. Sometimes that picture must be changed, because somebody finds a new datum that doesn't fit, or a new interpretation that works better than one that has become generally accepted. So it may pay you, as a science fiction writer, to know where and how these interpretive jumps have been made. You just might be able to think of an alternative that could be possible, and that could be the foundation of a good story.
TOOLS OF THE TRADE
You will need to know at least the basics of how astronomers collect data about stars and planets—partly because some of the descriptive picture is only understandable in terms of the observational methods used to assemble it, and partly because some of your characters may have to use those same methods in your stories. If you have a shipful of human explorers debating whether to try to land on a particular planet, they'll have to learn as much as they can about it from a distance. And you'll have to talk, at least superficially, about how they do it.
Telescopes
Until recently, essentially everything we knew about stars and planets was obtained by looking at them through telescopes on the surface of the Earth. Basically, a telescope is some combination of lenses and/or mirrors that forms an image of what it's pointed at. Sometimes that image is observed directly, but for serious astronomy it's more often recorded on a photographic plate. A popular misconception about telescopes is that their main purpose is to magnify the image. They do that, and it's important for close-up subjects like the Moon and the planets in our own Solar System; but their most important purpose in astronomy is to gather as much light as possible. Astronomers have been known to refer irreverently to a particularly large and expensive telescope as “a good light bucket.”
With the exception of our own Sun, or Sol (I will often use lowercase “sun” to mean the star around which any planet revolves), all the stars are so far away that their images remain mere pinpoints, not visible disks, even under the highest magnification we can muster with Earthly telescopes. Any planets that might accompany them would be completely invisible. What a telescope can do for a star is make its image much brighter. That's important because those great distances also mean most starlight is very faint. The vast majority of stars in the sky are invisible to the naked eye—even out in the country where on a clear night you might see a couple of thousand instead of two or three, which might be all you can manage in a big city.
The stars we can see with the naked eye are a very small sample of the ones that are out there, and not a truly representative sampling. To be visible from here, they must be relatively close or unusually bright. Most of the ones that look brightest—the ones with well-known names like Sirius, Betelgeuse or Antares—are both intrinsically bright and close. For reasons that you'll soon see, intrinsically bright stars are among the least likely prospects to have life-bearing planets, so “aliens from Antares” are another almost-sure giveaway for a writer who hasn't done his homework.
SCIENTIFIC NOTATION AND UNITS
Scientists, especially physicists and astronomers, often need to deal with quantities so large or small that ordinary numbers are impractical for writing them. To avoid the awkwardness of writing things like 3,121,000,000,000,000 or 0.0000000000096, they use scientific notation, in which any number is written as the product of an “ordinary” number, usually between 1 and 10, and 10 raised to some power. “10 to the nth power” means “10 multiplied by itself n times” and is usually written “10n.” For example 100 = 102; 10,000 = 104 and so on. 10 itself is 101.
Multiplication of different powers of the same number (or base) is easy: You just add exponents. Thus, 102 × 104 = 106. To divide, you subtract exponents: 106 ÷ 104 = 102. Those rules show you the meaning of negative exponents: 104 ÷ 106 = 10-2 = 0.01. Thus the long, hard-to-read numbers in the previous paragraph are written more compactly and clearly as 3.121 ×1015 and 9.6 × 1012.
For measurement, scientists generally use metric units—either mks (meters, kilograms and seconds) or cgs (centimeters, grams and seconds). In this book, I will usually follow that practice and assume that you learned the metric system in school; if not, look it up! However, since many of my readers are Americans and are not as comfortable with metric measurement as they should be, I will also occasionally use English units, particularly if I'm trying to convey a vivid mental picture of something.
There are also a few special units in common use among astronomers and spectroscopists. Wavelengths (see figure 3-1), especially those in the parts of the spectrum containing infrared, visible light, ultraviolet and X-rays, are often expressed in Angstrom units (1 Å = 10-8cm = 10-10 m).
Distances within the Solar System are sometimes expressed in astronomical units (1 AU = the mean radius of the Earth's orbit). By extension, in talking about other planetary systems, we will often take many quantities associated with the Earth and Sun and their relationship (such as mass, orbital radius and year length) to be numerically equal to 1. As you'll see in the section “A World-Building Primer,” this has the advantage of easily giving direct comparisons of other planets to ours.
Larger distances, such as those between stars, are often measured with one of two special units. A light-year is the distance light travels in one of Earth's years. Since the speed of light (often called c) is very close to 3 × 108 m/sec, or 186,000 mi/sec, a light-year is about 9.46 ×1015 meters, or 5.87 ×1012 miles.
Parsec (abbreviated “pc”) is shorthand for parallax second. It's based on the simplest method for measuring distances, namely looking at it from two viewpoints and measuring the angle between the two lines of sight. That's the method you use all the time when you're awake: Your brain measures the angle between the lines of sight as your two eyes look at the same object. The principle of astronomical parallax measurements is the same, but the two viewpoints, instead of two eyes, are different points in the Earth's orbit around the Sun. A parsec is equivalent to 3.26 light-years. (Note carefully: light-years and parsecs are always measures of distance. They are never units of time, and using them as if they were is a sure sign of an unprepared or careless science fiction writer!)
Temperatures are measured in degrees Celsius (C) or degrees Kelvin (K). Both scales use the same size degree (1.8 degrees Fahrenheit), but the zero points are different. 0 C is the freezing point of water, and absolute zero (the lowest possible [or almost-possible] temperature) is -273 C. 0 K is absolute zero and water freezes at + 273 K. The difference between the two scales is obviously important when talking about planetary surfaces, but is often of little consequence for stars, where temperatures are at least 3000 on either scale.
Since light gets “less bright” with distance by spreading its energy over a larger area, the easiest way to get a bright image of a very distant object like a star is to gather as much of its light as you can and focus it all into the image. That is the main function of a telescope, and the reason why, other things being equal, bigger is better in the telescope business. Light from, say, Deneb, arrives with equal intensity (energy per unit area per unit time) all over the Earth. The brightness of the image formed by a telescope is determined by the total energy brought to focus, and that is simply the intensity times the area of the main lens or mirror (the objective) of a telescope. A fully open human eye typically gathers light from a circular area about 6 mm in diameter, so a 50 mm binocular or telescope objective (as on 7 × 50 binoculars) gives you an image about 70 times as bright as you can see without it. The two-hundred-inch telescope at Mt. Palomar gives you a brightness advantage of more than 700,000 times—or about fourteen magnitudes. In other words, it lets you see stars down to magnitude twenty or so, instead of six. (That's assuming direct visual observation, which professional astronomers seldom use. They actually get an even bigger advantage, and see even more otherwise invisible stars, by recording their images with long exposures on sensitive photographic plates or films.)
STAR BRIGHTNESSES AND MAGNITUDES
Brightnesses of stars are expressed as magnitudes. Historically, the brightest stars in the sky were described as being of “first magnitude.” Somewhat less bright stars were called “second magnitude,” and so on. When it became feasible to measure the brightness of stars quantitatively, those terms became associated with precise numerical brightnesses, and it also became possible to have fractional magnitudes like 1.6.
Technically, the magnitude scale is logarithmic, but you usually won't need to be concerned about that. The essential points are that 1. the smaller the magnitude, the brighter the star; and 2. a difference of one magnitude is equivalent to a brightness ratio of 2.512 (the fifth root of 100). Thus a star of magnitude 1.3 is 2.512 times as bright (i.e., it gives us 2.512 times as much light) as one of magnitude 2.3, and 100 times as bright as one of magnitude 6.3. You can also have negative magnitudes. A star 100 times as bright as that 1.3 would have magnitude 1.3 - 5 = - 3.7. (An ironic side effect of making the scale quantitative is that the brightest star in our sky, Sirius, is no longer magnitude 1, but magnitude -1.6.)
Under good conditions, our unaided eyes can see stars from negative magnitudes down to about + 6. These are apparent magnitudes, measuring brightness as seen by us, and depend on both the star's intrinsic brightness and its distance from us. Light follows an “inverse square law": its intensity (amount of energy delivered to a standard area in a standard time) is inversely proportional to the distance from the source. For example, if you point a light meter at a candle in an otherwise dark room from one foot away, and then from ten feet away, the amount of light you measure at ten feet will be 1/100 of what it was at one foot. The explanation is simple. A candle (or star) emits a certain amount of light energy every second, and as it travels outward from the source that amount of energy is spread out over an evergrowing spherical surface, whose area is proportional to the square of its radius.
To compare the intrinsic brightnesses of stars, they are expressed as absolute magnitudes. The absolute magnitude is the apparent magnitude the star would have if viewed at a standard distance. That distance is chosen to be ten parsecs.
Spectroscopes
Just as important as the telescope is another instrument often used in conjunction with it: the spectroscope. Light is a form of electromagnetic radiation, a kind of wave produced whenever electrical charges vibrate (see figure 3-1). The light from a real source, such as a hot campfire or a distant star, usually contains a mixture of wavelengths (or, equivalently, frequencies). The job of the spectroscope is to tell you how much light the source is producing at each wavelength.
Why is that important? Since we can't form an image big enough to show pictorial detail for most stars, spectroscopy is the source of most of the detailed information we have about them—and that turns out to be quite a lot. First, hot bodies radiate their energy with a characteristic distribution over wavelengths (a “continuous spectrum” including some energy at all wavelengths over a broad range) whose detailed shape depends on temperature. (See figure 3-2.) In general, a hot body radiates at all wavelengths, but not equally. The hotter the radiator, the shorter the wavelength of maximum intensity. Since the longest visible waves are red and the shortest are violet, this means that as you heat an object, at first it doesn't glow at all, because all the waves it emits are longer than we can see. When it gets hot enough, it begins to glow red, at first dimly, then more brightly. As you continue to heat it, the glow becomes more yellowish, then white as the broad peak of the spectrum moves across the middle of the visible range, and finally bluish as the peak moves left of the visible range and the visible intensities in the spectrum decrease from the violet end toward the red. This observation applies directly to stars: The hottest stars look bluish and the coolest reddish.
FIGURE 3-1 Waves and Electromagnetic Radiation.
A Any wave can be thought of as a pattern of disturbance traveling through a medium. This sketch could be an instantaneous side view of a wave traveling through water whose undisturbed surface is the horizontal line labeled 0. At any position x, the surface is displaced up or down by a distance y; the maximum displacement is the amplitude, A. The entire wave is traveling to the right at speed v, so if the solid curve shows the surface at one instant, a time t later it looks like the dotted curve—that is, the entire pattern has moved to the right a distance v. The distance between successive crests (high points) or low points (troughs) is the wavelength, λ. If you watch any point on the surface, it oscillates up and down between y = A and y = -A; the number of oscillations per second is the frequency (f). (Oscillations per second used to be sensibly called “cycles/second"; now, for reasons that baffle the author, it's usually called by the far less informative name “hertz.”) The velocity of propagation of a wave is related to its frequency and wavelength by v = fλ.B In an electromagnetic wave, the kind of most interest to astronomers, the “medium” can be empty space and the “disturbance” is an electric or magnetic field at right angles to the direction the wave is traveling. In empty space, v for electromagnetic waves (or radiation) is c = 3 × 108 m/sec. Their wavelengths and frequencies cover an extremely wide range, commonly divided into several regions called by different names and studied with different kinds of instruments. The diagram shows the approximate ranges of wavelength designated by each of the common names. Note that visible light, as defined by humans, is a very small part of the total. Note also that gamma rays and X-rays overlap in wavelength; the terms refer less to wavelength than to how they're produced. In general, X-rays are produced in atomic (electron) transitions and gammas in nuclear or subnuclear.
A second important application of spectroscopy comes from the fact that when light passes through matter, some of it is absorbed. The absorption spectrum is discrete rather than continuous—that is, light is strongly absorbed only at certain sharply defined wavelengths. Which wavelengths are absorbed depends on the material doing the absorbing. Each element or compound has an absorption spectrum determined by its atomic or molecular structure, and therefore is as distinctive as a fingerprint. This is our main way of learning about the chemical composition of stars and planetary atmospheres. Most of the light we see from a star is produced by the hottest layers, and as it passes through cooler layers farther out, absorption lines are superimposed on the continuous hot-body spectrum. By comparing the absorption wavelengths with those characteristic of various substances, astronomers can identify chemical constituents of the cooler layers.
Sometimes the absorption lines in a star's spectrum don't exactly match those of known chemicals—unless you correct them for Doppler effect. That leads to a third important use of spectroscopy. Doppler effect is an apparent change in frequency and wavelength caused by motion of the source toward or away from the observer. You can get a cheap, easy demonstration by standing near a railroad crossing as a train approaches and passes while blowing its whistle.
FIGURE 3-2 Continuous spectra for stars of three “surface” temperatures: 3,000 K, 6,000 K and 10,000 K.
Since the train is initially moving toward you, the sound waves are “squeezed together” in front of it so that you perceive them as closer together (shorter wavelength) and arriving more often (higher frequency) than if the train were stationary. When the train is moving away from you, the opposite happens. So as the engineer sounds what he hears as a steady pitch, you hear it start out high and then drop as the train approaches and passes.
A stellar spectrum will often match a set of known chemical spectra if you assume that all the lines have been Doppler-shifted up or down because the star is moving toward or away from you at a certain speed. Such observations indicate that most galaxies are moving away from us (their light is shifted toward longer wavelengths, or “red-shifted”); and the farther away they are, the faster they're moving (and vice versa). This observation, known as Hub-ble's law, is one of the foundations of any cosmology (theory of the universe). At the other extreme, the Doppler effect can provide information at a much finer level of detail. If a star is rotating around an axis perpendicular to your line of sight, one side of it is moving toward you, one side away from you, and the middle part simply moves across your line of sight. Thus some of its light shows no Doppler shift, some is red-shifted by various amounts, and some is blue-shifted. The net result is that all its spectral lines are broadened, and the amount of broadening can be used to estimate how fast the star is rotating.
Other Sources of Data
The last few decades, and especially the last few years, have brought some dramatic additions to the astronomers' bag of tricks. First, visible light is not the only kind of radiation stars emit. Electromagnetic radiation ranges from gamma rays with wavelengths as short as 10-15 m, through X-rays, ultraviolet, visible light, infrared and radio waves, some with wavelengths of many kilometers. Out of that entire range, equivalent to many octaves of musical pitch, the unaided eye can see less than one octave. (For comparison, we hear about ten.)
Astronomical observations are now made in all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, and each tells astronomers things that the other parts can't. The equipment for observations in different parts of the spectrum looks very different. One of the best-known radio telescopes, for example, is the “dish” at Arecibo, which is built into a bowl-like valley in the mountains of Puerto Rico.
Second (and third, and well beyond), our newfound capability for traveling or sending instruments into space has completely revolutionized astronomical fact-finding. As somebody said at least a decade ago, “Astronomy has changed more in the last ten years than in the previous four hundred.”
Telescopes and spectroscopes on Earth have always been plagued by clouds, haze, atmospheric turbulence, dust, industrial pollution and stray light from cities and towns. All of those problems can be eliminated if you put your instruments outside the atmosphere. Thus, despite its early problems, the Hubble telescope has already been able to do many things that no telescope before it could—including the first direct observation of numerous planetary systems in the process of formation. Many astronomers are eager to get still more instruments “out there,” whether in Earth orbit, on the Moon or still farther out.
Finally, space travel has made it possible to get, literally, a much closer look at other bodies in our own Solar System than we ever had before. We have now seen most of the major and a good many of the minor bodies “close-up,” in television pictures and instrument readings sent back by robotic spacecraft flying by or even landing there.
Is this important for science fiction writers? Profoundly! When we first started getting telemetry from other planets, instantly revolutionizing our pictures of them, it seemed to me that one of the first effects on science fiction writers was to make them a little afraid to set stories on “local” planets. If you wrote a story about Mars while a probe was on its way there, whatever you said might be hopelessly obsolete by the time the story was published.
But that phase soon passed. Soon so much brand-new information about the planets was in hand that fiction writers could no longer resist the temptation to start weaving it into stories. It's an exciting thing to be able to speculate about Mercury or Jupiter using knowledge that nobody on Earth had even six months ago. Of course, it can also keep the writing process a bit tense. One of the first novels I serialized in Analog Science Fiction and Fact was Bob Buckley's World in the Clouds, which dealt with humans colonizing the atmosphere of Venus. Bob was writing this, and I was editing it, at a time when American and Soviet probes were descending into the atmosphere of Venus and sending back packet after packet of firsthand information about what was actually down there. Bob, like any good science fiction writer, wanted to get it as right as he could. So every time a new burst of data came back, I'd get a big brown envelope containing several replacement pages to stick into his manuscript.
FROM BIG BANG TO GALAXIES
Fascinating as our local planets are, their potential as homes for aliens is rather limited. In any case, they are simply special cases of the general principles describing stars and planets everywhere. So I'm not going into a detailed discussion of conditions on each of the planets and moons of our Solar System. Instead I'm going right to the description of how stars and planets form, and what forms they can take as a result.
In the beginning, according to the best guesses of most contemporary astronomers, all the matter in the universe was concentrated in an extremely small space, and in one very brief period it started expanding—in other words, it exploded. This explosion, popularly known as the Big Bang, is the starting point for most current models of cosmology—the history of the universe. A number of problems in the details have led to variations on the theme, such as inflationary models, but since this book is about aliens and few of their personal problems are likely to be on such a scale, I won't elaborate on them here. (Of course, some science fiction writers will rise to almost any challenge! For an example of some aliens who do have such problems, see Marianne Dyson's “The Critical Factor.”) If you want to go deeper into the fascinating enigmas of cosmology, you might start with the Rothman and Ellis article in the References.
For most alien-creating purposes, you'll need only the basic outline of how the universe is believed to have developed. With all that matter suddenly expanding outward from the Big Bang, structure begins to develop. Some pieces are moving faster than others, so after a given time, the faster pieces have moved farther than the slower ones, thus accounting for Hubble's Law. (No, this does not imply that we are at the center of the universe or the original site of the Big Bang. If you look a little closer at the dynamics of such a system, it turns out that every fragment sees all the others receding from itself at speeds proportional to their distances.)
Initially, there are no stars or galaxies; all the matter in the universe started out in a space small compared to such things. Initially the matter itself is not in familiar forms like atoms and molecules. We'll skip over the brief initial period when things were still striving toward even that degree of familiarity, and rejoin the story when we have an expanding cloud consisting principally of hydrogen. The initial explosion is so violent that soon this material is spread quite thinly, by our standards—and not uniformly.
Gravity, the weak but ubiquitous attraction of all matter for all other matter, tends to increase the “lumpiness” in the primitive universe. The gravitational force between two bodies is proportional to the product of their masses, and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. (F = GMm/r2, where G is the universal gravitational constant [values are listed in various unit systems in standard tables of physical constants], M and m are the two masses, and r is the distance between their centers.) Thus bodies that are already close together attract each other more strongly than those that are far apart. So if you look at a region in which the thin primordial gas is a bit denser than in surrounding regions, the dense “clump” will tend to get even denser as its constituent particles draw each other even closer.
So the general trend is for the universe to get lumpier. Initially we're talking about very large “lumps”—clumps of gas that we would still consider a pretty good vacuum, spread over volumes millions of light-years across, but still enough denser than their surroundings to begin acting like fairly well-defined lumps, that continue drawing still closer together.
Quite likely any such lump you look at will be spinning—a very slow spin, in everyday terms, but still representing quite a lot of angular momentum. Angular momentum is easily defined for something simple like a small but heavy mass (such as a fishing sinker) being swung around in a circle on a string. You simply multiply the mass by its speed, and multiply that by the radius of the circle. (L = mvr, where L is the angular momentum, v is the tangential velocity, and r is the radius of the circle.)
For a more complicated object, like a galaxy or a stuffed giraffe being spun on an axis through its shoulders, angular momentum is more complicated in practice, but not much more so in essence. The trick is to regard the more complicated system as made up of a lot of small masses revolving about an axis, calculate the angular momentum for each, and add them all up. (Which is a little more complicated than it sounds, since it's a vector—that is, it has both a magnitude [size] and a direction. In the unlikely event that you need the details, they're readily available in standard physics texts.)
The important thing about angular momentum is that it, like energy, is conserved. That is, if changes happen within a system (without forces being imposed from outside), the angular momentum stays the same. A familiar example of conservation of angular momentum is an ice skater performing a spin. If she starts the spin with arms and a leg outstretched, and slowly draws them in, she spins faster and faster. Since each of her parts still has the same mass, but its distance from the spin axis is decreasing, its speed has to increase to keep the product constant.
The same thing happens with astronomically large masses of gas that are gravitationally contracting. As matter gets closer to the axis of spin, the rate of spin must increase. Then something else comes into play: the effect commonly described as “centrifugal force,” even though in strict physical terms it isn't really a force at all, but simply the tendency (Newton's First Law) for anything in motion to continue in motion at the same speed and in the same direction unless acted upon by an external force. That fishing sinker being swung on a string would prefer to fly in a straight line (and it will, if the line breaks). To make it go in a circle, the string must provide a centripetal (toward-the-center) force. The person holding the other end of the string feels an away-from-center force, and therefore is likely to say, if the string breaks and the sinker flies off, that it was made to do so by a centrifugal force.
If the string is slowly pulled in, forcing the sinker to travel in a smaller but faster circle, more and more force is needed to make the circle still smaller. Extending the principle to big globs of gas in space, you can see why they tend to flatten: The same amount of gravitational attraction will pull matter in more effectively along the axis of rotation than perpendicular to it, since the latter has to work against the “centrifugal” tendency of off-axis matter to fly off on a tangent. The net result is that if you start with a roughly spherical glob of galactic size, it contracts faster along the polar axis than at the equator. First it develops an equatorial bulge, and eventually looks more like a spinning disk than a ball. For more complicated reasons, galaxies that form into disks often develop pinwheel-like spiral arms, and so are called spiral galaxies. Different initial conditions and different stages of evolution also lead to other types of galaxies, such as elliptical (really ellipsoidal) and irregular.
Our Solar System is located in one arm of a spiral galaxy often called the Milky Way (figure 3-3). Our Galaxy will serve as a good illustration of the kinds of sizes and distances involved in galaxies. It contains something like 100 billion (1011) stars, most lying in a disk approximately 100,000 light-years in diameter and averaging some 1,500 light-years thick. There's also a central bulge, and the whole thing is surrounded by a roughly spherical cloud of hot gas with a few scattered stars, mostly in dense globular clusters.
The Solar System (of which Earth is a small part) lies about 30,000 light-years out from the galactic center. (For comparison, the Earth is only eight light-minutes from Sol.) That's why we see our galaxy, when we see it at all, as a “Milky Way.” In that band of directions, we're looking along the galactic plane, with dense stars extending thousands of light-years out. In other directions, we're looking more or less directly out through the nearest part of the disk, with a relatively thin layer of stars before we come to “empty” intergalactic space.
FIGURE 3-3 The disk of our Galaxy, seen along its polar axis (top) and from the edge. The roughly spherical halo surrounding the disk is not shown.
“Intergalactic” means many orders of magnitude more distant than merely “interstellar.” As a science fiction writer, you must be well aware of the difference. You cannot talk casually about “aliens from another galaxy” coming to Earth with spaceflight technology not very different from ours. Our nearest “neighbor” galaxies are the Magellanic Clouds, two irregular galaxies a couple of hundred thousand light-years from ours, while the nearest galaxies very similar to our own are a couple of million light-years away. Anyone traveling from one to another must use very advanced technology, and quite possibly some science beyond any we know.
You might think this would mean that galaxies as such would seldom be of more than background interest to science fiction writers, but in fact they can play a very central role. My novel The Sins of the Fathers grew directly out of the fact that galaxies sometimes suffer enormous explosions involving their entire cores. The radiation from such an explosion could render planets uninhabitable throughout the affected galaxy—and we wouldn't know if our Galaxy had become uninhabitable until the deadly radiation started arriving. But suppose we were given a little bit of advanced warning, and an offer of help, by some aliens who already knew, could travel faster than the radiation, and could move entire planetary populations to another galaxy for safety.
Yes, those aliens—the Kyyra—were very advanced. But they've given me two novels so far, and I had a lot of fun (and learned a lot) working with them.
A MENAGERIE OF STARS, AND HOW IT GREW
Meanwhile, back at our forming galaxy, we still have to account for the existence of stars. By the time the collapsing cloud is down to something like galactic size, matter has become dense enough for atoms to collide and form molecules, and for molecules to collide and build up dust particles. We're still talking about very sparse matter—a better vacuum than you'd find on the Moon, for example—but we're also talking about time scales of billions of years. So after a while the incipient galaxy contains not only hydrogen and a smattering of slightly heavier atoms, but some simple molecules and dust.
For the same reasons that the original cosmic cloud got lumpy, and the lumps started turning into galaxies, the protogalactic cloud also gets lumpy, and the lumps, if they're in the right mass range, turn into stars. Star formation is most likely to occur in nebulae, clouds of relatively dense gas and dust (such as the well-known “stellar nursery” in the constellation Orion). If a piece of protostellar size separates out, it, just like the bigger one that formed a galaxy, contracts under the gravitational attraction of its parts toward each other. If it has any spin, it will tend to accelerate, for the same reasons as a figure skater or an incipient galaxy.
But a couple of additional things happen as a protostar collapses and spins faster. The average density in such a cloud is much higher than in a whole galaxy, and so atoms collide more often. They also collide at higher speeds: Like any falling objects, the atoms in a protostellar nebula speed up. Since energy is conserved, all that gravitational potential energy is converted first into kinetic energy of infalling objects and then spread around to other atoms by high-speed collisions. In other words, the interior gets both denser and hotter.
A lot hotter. The collisions become so violent that the electrons are stripped off many of the atoms, converting the gas to a plasma (a gas consisting not of electrically neutral atoms, but electrically charged particles including bare nuclei and loose electrons). When the core gets hot enough, some of those colliding nuclei can stick together to form larger and more complex nuclei—the process called thermonuclear fusion. The first fusion reaction to ignite in a new star is actually a sequence of reactions, but their net effect is the jamming together of four hydrogen nuclei (protons) to form one helium nucleus, with the release of a huge amount of energy. This reaction is now Sol's source of energy, and is expected to remain so, at roughly its present level of output, for maybe eight billion more years.
How long a star can sustain itself by hydrogen fusion depends primarily on its initial mass. In general, the more massive a star is, the more fuel it has, but the faster it burns it. Thus, the most massive stars burn hottest and brightest and exhaust themselves most quickly.
Stars are commonly classified according to their continuous spectra, or, equivalently, their temperatures (more precisely, the temperatures of the layers from which most light is emitted). The classes (or types), in order of decreasing temperature and increasing redness, are called 0, B, A, F, G, K and M. (The time-honored mnemonic is “Oh, Be A Fine Girl, Kiss Me.”) Table 3-1 summarizes the essential properties of each class. Each class subdivides into ten subclasses, each identified by a number after the letter, such as GO, Gl,… G9. (Sol is usually considered a G2.)
One of the columns in table 3-1 is 'Time on Main Sequence.” If you plot the luminosities (or absolute magnitudes) of the stars in a region of space against their temperatures (or spectral classes), you get something like figure 3-4, often called a Hertzsprung-Russell (H-R) diagram. (For more detailed versions, see astronomy texts such as Smith and Jacobs.) The main sequence is the diagonal band running from upper left to lower right, which is where most stars spend most of their lives.
ClassTemperatureColorLuminosityTime on main sequenceO25,000 & upBlue30,000 8 × 106B10,000-25,000Blue100-30,0008 × 106-4 × 108A8,000-10,000Blue5-1004 × 108-4 × 109F6,000-8,000Blue-white1.2-4.84 × 109-1 × 1010G5,000-6,000Yellow-white0.4-1.21.1 × 1010-42.7 × 1010K3,700-5,000Orange-red0.l-0.352.8 × 1010-41011M3,700Red0.l 1011Table 3-1 Spectral Classes of Stars.(Temperatures are in degrees Kelvin (K), luminosity in solar units [i.e., the Sun's luminosity = 1], and time on main sequence in Earth years. Ranges given are approximate; values quoted in different sources vary slightly.)
A protostar first enters the H-R diagram near the upper right, that is, as a red giant. It is still contracting from a large protostellar nebula, and when it finally gets hot enough to emit any visible light, that light barely touches the red end of the visible spectrum. Its luminosity is high, not because each square centimeter of it is very bright, but because there are a great many square centimeters. As it continues to contract, the luminosity decreases—that is, the star moves downward on the right side of the H-R diagram—rather quickly, in astronomical terms. When hydrogen fusion begins, the star moves onto the main sequence at a point determined by its mass. The blue giants of class O, perhaps 20 or 30 times as massive as Sol, burn tens of thousands of times as brightly as the Sun, but only last a few million years. Sol should last at least ten billion years (and probably still has more than half its lifetime to go). The orange and red dwarfs of types K and M are expected to stay on the main sequence for tens of billions of years—much longer than the estimated age of our Galaxy, so presumably none of these stars have yet left the main sequence.
Why should a star ever leave the main sequence? Eventually all the hydrogen “fuel” is used up, and the thermonuclear reactions that have maintained a sort of equilibrium for so long must stop. No longer “inflated” by those reactions, the core again begins to contract under the influence of gravity. Again gravitational energy is converted to thermal, so the core temperature rises—enough to overcome the effect of gravity on the cooler outer layers and begin pushing them out. As they expand, they cool; but their surface area increases even faster, with the net result that the star gets bigger, redder and brighter. In other words, it moves up and to the right off the main sequence, becoming (again) a red giant. (From here, that means “a whitish star with an excess of red.” Close-up, it's probably a good deal more complex and interesting. See Poul Anderson's story “Starfog,” Chesley Bonestell's cover painting, and John W. Campbell's editorial in the same issue of Analog [August 1967], for a discussion of why a close-up view of such a star might look more like a brilliant white dwarf surrounded by a thin reddish cloud.)
FIGURE 3-4 Hertzsprung-Russell (H-R) diagram relating brightness of stars to their mass and spectral class.
Yes, this will happen to Sol eventually, as to all other main-sequence stars. (There's plenty of story potential in that simple observation, by the way. If humankind aspires to lasting more than a few billion years [which, admittedly, would break all previous records for longevity of a species], it will have to spread beyond this Solar System, since the Sun's expansion to red giant status will incinerate any nearby planets.) But the end of hydrogen fusion and expansion to red giantdom is not the end of a star's story. Remember that the core is still getting smaller and hotter. When it gets hot enough (on the order of one hundred million Kelvin), a new fusion reaction can begin, converting helium to carbon and moving the star back to the left (toward the main sequence) on the Hertz-sprung-Russell diagram. When the helium is exhausted, the outer layers again expand while the core resumes contracting. When the core gets hot enough, yet another fusion reaction begins, “burning” carbon to produce oxygen, neon and magnesium.
You see the pattern: An old star goes through a succession of stages using the elements produced by previous fusion reactions to build heavier and heavier elements. How do they get to places like the Amazon rain forest or your pantry? Stay tuned….
This process of building higher and higher elements can only go so far; elements heavier than iron don't lend themselves to being built by fusion. Eventually a star runs out of nuclear energy sources, and the core resumes contracting—and still further heating—while the outer layers expand. Typically, the outer layers are lost altogether, either gradually or by more or less violent events such as the explosions called novas (or novae), while the core is left behind as a very small, hot, dense, white star called a white dwarf. For a star of relatively little mass (like Sol), things are pretty much downhill from there. Eventually the star (which used to be the core of a bigger star) can be compressed no further; its gravitational attraction cannot overcome the mutual repulsion of atoms. So the size stabilizes and the star is no longer producing new thermal energy to replace what it radiates. So, very slowly, it cools and dims, eventually fading away as a black dwarf.
A somewhat more massive star (above 1.4 solar masses) can meet a more dramatic end. Its gravitational attraction is strong enough to, in effect, squash the electrons into the nuclei of its atoms, converting the entire star to “neutronium,” a form of matter consisting of densely packed neutrons. Such matter is far denser than anything in our everyday experience; the mass of the Sun might be squeezed into a sphere only ten or twenty kilometers in diameter. Furthermore, the spin acceleration that occurs with contraction has been carried to extremes. A neutron star makes a complete rotation in a time on the order of a second, producing the rapidly periodic bursts of radiation that we know as a pulsar.
A still more massive star can meet the most dramatic of all ends. It can collapse to such a high density that even light can no longer escape it, leaving a black hole.
Neutron stars and black holes have a host of extraordinary properties, which have too little to do with “routine” alien-building to warrant my spending much time on them here. I will, however, say a bit more about them in the last chapter. Such exotic possibilities do offer exceptional story potential (see, for example, Robert L. Forward's novel Dragon's Egg, about life on a neutron star), but developing that potential poses challenges that go well beyond most writers' needs.
Meanwhile, there's a bit more that we need to say about stellar evolution. The fusion reactions I've described can't account for all the elements and isotopes we observe. Where do the others come from? Remember that old stars tend to eject their outer layers into space. That matter gets mixed back into the interstellar medium, portions of which may gather and form new stars. These “second (or later) generation” stars, containing material from earlier stars, have an important difference from “first-generation” stars. First generation stars had only hydrogen and a little helium to use as raw materials when they got hot enough to support thermonuclear reactions, which limited what reactions could take place. Later-generation stars already contain bits of heavier elements that were produced in earlier generations, and these can participate in new kinds of reactions to produce nuclei not possible in first-generation stars. Such reactions “fill in the gaps"; furthermore, some of those reactions produce neutrons that can cause still other reactions producing still other isotopes—including elements heavier than iron.
Making the very heaviest elements requires quantities of neutrons that are probably produced only in supernovas (or superno-vae). A supernova is an extremely violent explosion that ends the life of some very massive stars. This is one of the few incidents in stellar evolution that happens fast enough for humans to observe directly (the time scale is on the order of days); however, such events are extremely rare. They average maybe one per galaxy per century—which is probably fortunate, since a supernova can temporarily become brighter than the entire galaxy that contains it, and produce radiation that could drastically affect life on planets of even moderately nearby stars. There is obvious story potential in that (see, for example, Poul Anderson's “Supernova” and my “The Prophet”). There is also less obvious relevance for stories that might seem to have no connection with such things. As we shall see in the next section, planets are a by-product of star formation, and therefore must be made of materials present in the nebula from which their sun formed. Since so many elements can only be produced in late-generation stars, and some of them only in supernovas, a solar system like ours, with a rich variety of even heavy elements, must have had earlier ancestors, almost certainly including at least one supernova. A planet forming around a first generation star, or from a nebula containing only a little input from earlier generations, would be poor in metals and other heavy elements. Any civilization that developed there would necessarily be different from ours. (See, for example, Jack Vance's Big Planet.)
A MOST IMPORTANT SPINOFF: PLANETS AND MOONS
The second important thing that happens as a protostar contracts and spins faster and faster is that it flattens into a disk—and pieces of material break off at the equator. Those can then condense into planets, and angular momentum can be transferred to them from the central star, causing the planets to follow stable orbits around the central star. A similar process on a still smaller scale can cause the planets themselves to be circled by still smaller satellites.
The details are much more complicated, of course, and still not completely understood. Until very recently, the only example of such a “solar system” we had ever seen was the one we live in. One of the long-standing central controversies in astronomy has concerned the frequency of planet formation: Are the Earth and its siblings unique, or are this galaxy and others full of such things? Science fiction writers would usually prefer the latter, for the obvious reason that it suggests a much wider range of story possibilities. (If we knew that we were unique, there wouldn't be much point in my writing this book!)
Most astronomical thought in recent years has been on the science fiction writers' side, suggesting that planets were relatively common, but that suspicion remained a conjecture founded on theory and unsupported by direct observation. Lately that has been changing—in fact, while I was working on this chapter, a report came out that the Hubble telescope had detected disks like those expected in emerging solar systems around many of the young stars in the Orion Nebula.
Since planets are expected to condense from a disk spun out from the equator of a spinning protostar, you would expect their orbits to lie at least approximately in the same plane. They can be perturbed by gravitational interaction with passing bodies from outside, but when the orbit of one planet in a system is significantly skewed from that of the others (like that of Pluto in our system) you might suspect that that planet itself is a former outsider that has been gravitationally captured.
The characteristics of planets, like those of stars, are largely determined by their masses. In the case of planets, there is another major determining factor as well: the nature of the primary, or “sun,” and the distance at which the planet orbits. Moreover, these factors interact.
In our Solar System, the planets (with the possible exception of Pluto, which may be an adopted outsider) seem to fall naturally into two broad categories. The innermost planets—Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars—can be lumped together as “terrestrials": Relatively small, rocky bodies whose atmospheres, if any, are heavy in such gases as nitrogen, water, carbon dioxide and oxygen. The outer planets—Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune—are “jovians” (i.e., like Jupiter): gas giants, much larger than the terrestrials, with thick atmospheres (at least some of them may not even have solid cores) consisting largely of the same sorts of light gases that are common in the interstellar medium (lots of hydrogen and helium, with smaller amounts of methane and ammonia).
It's no coincidence that the terrestrials lie close to the Sun and the jovians farther out. Originally, all the planets must have had the same general composition as the protostellar nebula from which they formed. The jovians, far from the primary star, still have something close to that composition, and most of their original mass. The terrestrials have lost much of their original mass, and in particular the lightest gases, because their proximity to the primary heated those light gases enough to escape their gravity.
For a science fiction writer, “terrestrials and jovians” is probably too simple and limited a classification for all the kinds of planets that might exist. The variations within each class are fairly large—Mercury, for example, is much smaller and hotter than Earth, with little or no atmosphere, while Venus is about the same size as Earth but has a much denser atmosphere and a much hotter surface. If the universe is as full of planets as it seems, it's unlikely that our small local collection contains samples of all possible types. Other planetary systems may, for example, contain planets intermediate between Earth and Neptune, or more massive than Jupiter.
Since the nature of planets must be determined by the laws of physics and chemistry, we can make some educated guesses about the types that might exist. As a science fiction writer, I've found it useful to think of them in terms of an expanded classification system described by science fiction writer Poul Anderson (in Is There Life on Other Worlds?): superjovians, jovians, subjovians, superter-restrials, terrestrials and subterrestrials.
Superjovians
These planets would have masses several times that of Jupiter. Really large ones, with masses ten or fifteen times Jupiter's, might represent the borderline between stars (which shine by their own light) and planets (which don't). They may have quite hot cores, and if they were just a little more massive, might be able to start their own fusion reactions. (Such objects are sometimes called “brown dwarfs.”) The compositions of superjovians should be quite starlike, with hydrogen overwhelmingly predominant, helium abundant and everything else “mere traces” (which may still mean quite large tonnages, by our reckoning, but very spread out).
More mass does not necessarily mean larger diameter. It may lead to greater compression, so Jupiter itself may be close to the maximum possible diameter for a planet. Such compression implies that superjovians hold their atmospheres more tightly, and therefore could keep them (and remain superjovians) even in orbits too close to the primary for planets like our jovians. It also implies that they would be spinning very rapidly and might therefore be very flattened along the polar axis, with much stronger “effective gravity” at the poles than at the equator.
Hal Clement has described such a world, Mesklin, in his novel Mission of Gravity. Mesklin's day—that is, the time it takes to spin once on its axis—is about eighteen minutes. Standing on its equator, you would feel about three times as heavy as on Earth; on a pole, about seven hundred times. Needless to say, such a world would impose very special requirements on anything that lived there. We're not in a position to say much about those yet, but we shall surely return to Mesklin later.
Meanwhile, I'll mention another option for somewhat less exotic life in connection with a superjovian. Such a planet could have a more or less terrestrial planet as a satellite, and since a superjovian can be stable relatively close to its star, its moon could be relatively Earthlike and harbor life. It would, of course, have some unusual characteristics. Because of tidal forces (about which we shall say more later), it would probably be locked into synchronous rotation, always keeping the same face toward the superjovian, just as our Moon is locked into facing Earth. Inhabitants of the “near” side would, unless the satellite's orbit was very tilted, have what we would consider quite unusual cycles of light and darkness, with eclipses every day and nights dominated by a huge, bright “moon.” Residents of the “far” side might have more “normal” days and nights, but never suspect that the superjovian primary existed—until their first explorers to circumnavigate their globe got a big surprise!
Jovians
These planets, comparable in mass and size to our Jupiter and Saturn, must lie relatively far from their sun, for the reasons already mentioned. They can lie closer to a cooler star than to a hotter one. A few decades ago, the possibility of life on such worlds used to be shrugged off on the grounds that they would be too cold. Now we recognize that it's not necessarily so. For one thing, those thick atmospheres have powerful greenhouse effects, and their deeper layers may be quite balmy. For another, we're not really very sure what is too cold for life. In any case, before we can say much about the possibility of life on these or other kinds of planets, we'll have to take a closer look at how life works—first in the few cases that we know about, and second, in the many that we can at least dimly imagine. That will be the business of the next chapter.
Subjovians
These planets, like Uranus or Neptune, are more like jovians than terrestrials, but with appreciable differences in composition and related characteristics. The smaller masses and higher densities of our known specimens, compared to Jupiter and Saturn, suggest that they have lost more of their hydrogen and helium, and therefore have higher concentrations of heavier elements.
Why did they lose more of the lightest elements? Since Uranus and Neptune are farther from the Sun than Jupiter and Saturn, the explanation in their case is presumably that they started off with less mass, and didn't have enough gravity to keep the light atoms from leaving. In other places, a similar effect might be obtained by starting with a larger mass closer to its star. Increased gravity would make it harder for light atoms to leave, but more solar energy would help them overcome the larger barrier. If you made the starting mass smaller still, or put it closer to the primary, these changes would go still further, leading to …
Super-terrestrials
This type is somewhat more Earthlike than Uranus or Neptune, but still sufficiently different to seem quite exotic. A planet with eight times the Earth's mass, and the same density, would have twice the diameter and twice the surface gravity. Without observational data, it's hard to say how close the densities of such planets might actually be to that of Earth. On one hand, the greater mass might lead to greater compression and higher densities. On the other hand, that tendency might be offset by an ability to retain more of the planet's original supply of light elements. Other things being equal, a higher surface gravity might lead to a denser atmosphere and stronger greenhouse effect, though the atmospheric density and pressure would fall off more quickly with altitude. Too close to its star, such a planet might cook like Venus; or it might maintain something like temperatures we like around a cooler star.
Terrestrials
This class, now more narrowly defined to mean planets with masses quite close to that of Earth, can still be wildly different—as our two known examples dramatically demonstrate. Venus, with a mass very nearly the same as Earth's, has an atmosphere whose surface pressure is some hundred times that on Earth, whose temperature is high enough to melt lead, and whose composition would be extremely toxic to us.
Subterrestrials
These planets include bodies like Mercury, Mars and the Moon: Appreciably smaller than Earth, rocky, and commonly with little or no atmosphere—though I say that more cautiously than I would have a few years ago. As my choice of examples indicates, such bodies can occur either as “independent” planets or as satellites of larger ones, and their atmosphere or lack of it depends very much on where they are. Mercury has little, if any, atmosphere, because of its proximity to the Sun; but some of the satellites of Jupiter and Saturn are of quite similar size and now appear to be some of the more promising abodes for native life in our Solar System. (For details, see the latest results from space probes to the outer Solar System!)
A WORLD-BUILDING PRIMER
There is a great deal more that I could have said about the topics in this chapter, but space does not permit. Any galaxy, star or planet is a far more complex thing than I've made it sound; I've had to summarize and hit the highlights because our main interest in this book is aliens—the things that might live on these worlds. How deeply you get into the details of world-building depends both on your interest in such things and on the nature of your story.
You will obviously need to get more detailed about your aliens' world of origin if your story's action takes place on that world than if your aliens merely visit humans on their own turf. In The Sins of the Fathers, I said very little about the original form of the Kyyra's home world (though I knew quite a bit about the history that led from it to their present situation). We only saw them thousands of light-years from where they started, and even before they left, their technology had changed their home world into something very different. In Mission of Gravity or Poul Anderson's The People of the Wind, on the other hand, the nature of the world and the beings it produced were central to the story. (Chapter ten gives more details about these stories.) Hal Clement imagined an exotic world that could exist and tried to figure out what kind of life and civilization might develop in such a place. Poul Anderson imagined a kind of being and tried to figure out how it could exist—and what kind of world could make it so.
If you want to try either of those things—creating fully fleshed beings and a world that could make them, or vice versa—you must expect to put considerable care and effort into your world-building. You will need more detailed information than I can give you here. On the other hand, if you start with a general idea of your plot and merely need aliens who can fill a particular kind of role in it, you may only need a general idea of the bounds of plausibility. (However, I have never known a story to suffer from its author's knowing its background too well, as long as he knew when to stop talking about it. In general, the more vividly you have visualized the scenes and actors, the richer your tale will be.)
No matter where on that spectrum your ambitions lie, you will likely want to think your aliens' home world out in at least broad outline. So let's talk through the basic sequence of steps that such thinking is likely to follow, and then I'll direct you to some additional sources where you can go for more detail or concrete examples.
The Importance of Your Star
You start with a star, since everything else is shaped by that. As I've already hinted, you'll seldom, if ever, want to use a “big-name” star like Deneb or Sirius. Such stars are usually giants. The blue and white ones lie high on the left end of the main sequence, and the time they spend there is likely too short for them to evolve advanced life even if they form planets—and there is some evidence (albeit controversial) that they usually don't. The red giants are either in a brief formational stage, or one of the later episodes of swelling after finishing one nuclear fuel—a process that probably destroys any life-bearing planets they might have had.
At the other extreme, red dwarfs, at least those at the extreme lower right, are likely too feeble to develop life on any planets they might have. So you'll most likely want a star somewhere fairly far to the right on the main sequence, but not too far. Several writers have estimated that for a planet to be habitable by us or reasonably similar beings, the star's spectral class should probably lie between classes F5 and K5. Within that range, you can start with Earthlike conditions and life-forms and imagine how they might be modified by somewhat different conditions. More dissimilar beings may evolve around more dissimilar stars, but developing them will require more than elementary world-building.
If you can't use “big-name” stars, what can you use? The stars we can see are identified and catalogued in some way. One of the most common methods is to use a Greek letter, in order of decreasing brightness, followed by the genitive case of the Latin name of the constellation in which the star appears from Earth. (A constellation is not a cluster of stars, close together, but merely a group that is in nearly the same direction from Earth. From a planet of another star the constellations would be different—the farther from Earth, the more different.) Thus the brightest star in the constellation Centaurus is Alpha Centauri, the next brightest is Beta Centauri, and so on. In general, you'll need to use a real star only if it's important that your aliens hail from somewhere fairly close—say, a couple of dozen light-years—of Sol. If you do, you'll have to consult a table of nearby stars (the ones in the Dole and Kepner books in the References are particularly useful) and make sure that the properties you describe are consistent with the ones your chosen star actually has. If your star doesn't have to be so close, you're usually better off inventing a possible one and letting your characters name it.
A large percentage (say, a third to a half) of the “stars” we see are actually double or multiple star systems—two or more stars orbiting each other (more precisely, their common center of mass), probably having formed in a way similar to star-and-planet systems. Alpha Centauri, for example, is really a triple star, which, for many purposes, can be treated as a double—but never as a single like Sol. Alpha Centauri A is a class G star similar to Sol; Alpha Centauri is a smaller star (class K) in an eccentric orbit with a period of about eighty years. A and B are sometimes as close as 11.2 AU apart and sometimes as far as 35.2 AU. Component C, sometimes called Proxima Centauri (because it's presently the closest to us), is so small and orbits the A-B combination at such a great distance that you can usually ignore it in considering A or B. But if you want your aliens to come from Alpha Centauri A you will surely have to consider the complications B causes in such matters as climate and evolution.
Those complications, and still more dramatic ones such as the interactions that can occur when the components of a binary get very close, can certainly provide good story material. In Jerry Oltion and Lee Goodloe's story “Contact,” a human-alien cultural contact coincides with an astronomical contact that will doom a native civilization. If you use a double star, you must expect those complications to play an important role in shaping your story, and you must be prepared to work out the details and their consequences. Unless you're prepared to do those things, you'll be better off putting your aliens' planet around a single star.
Once you have your star, you can start putting planets around it. Where you put them, and what you've chosen for a sun, will immediately determine some of the fundamental characteristics of your planet. One of the first considerations will be the amount of light reaching the planet's surface. From the H-R diagram, and equations and/or diagrams in the references, you can determine the mass (M) and brightness or luminosity (L) of your sun.
You'll probably find it most convenient to measure these and other parameters in terms of the corresponding values for Sol and Earth. For example, the irradiation or insolation (amount of energy per unit time) reaching a planet at distance r is
i = L/r2.
For Earth, we take L (for Sol) to be 1, and r (the Sun-to-Earth distance) as 1, and find i = 1—i.e., unit insolation means the amount of energy we on Earth get from the Sun. A planet 2 AU from Sol would have i = ¼; getting one-fourth as much solar energy (per area) as Earth does.
If you choose an F6 star for a story, you'll find it has about 1.25 times the mass of Sol, and 2.2 times the luminosity. (For main sequence stars, to good approximation, L=M3.5.) To give your planet the same insolation, or rate of receiving solar radiation, you'll have to put it about 1.5 times as far from this hotter sun as Earth is from Sol. Of course, it still won't get exactly the same kind of radiation that we do. Since its star is hotter, its light will be whiter, richer in ultraviolet, more likely to show erratic flare-ups, and so forth.
Once you know the mass of your system's sun, and your planet's distance from it, the planet's period of revolution (P), or year length, is determined. For any planet in a circular (or nearly circular) orbit around a much more massive sun,
P2 = r3/M.
Again taking “our” values of all the parameters as units, the period for our sample planet in a 1.5 AU orbit about a 1.3 solar mass F7 star is
A longer year will affect conditions on the surface and the nature of things that evolve there. For example, if this planet has an atmosphere and axial tilt similar to those of Earth, it will show similar seasonal variations—except that all the seasons will be longer than ours. Temperate zones will have more time to heat up in the summer and cool down in the winter, so everything that lives there will have to be adapted to more extreme seasonal variations of temperature and precipitation.
Day Length and Axial Tilt
There are no such simple rules for predicting axial tilt and day length, so in choosing those you have more leeway. There are some constraints—for example, a planet that orbits quite close to its sun will have its rotation slowed by tidal forces so that eventually it will be locked into one of two kinds of synchronous rotation. (Tidal forces result from the fact that the gravitational pull on the parts of a planet or a satellite closer to its primary is stronger than on the parts farther away. They also cause ocean tides and make it impossible for a satellite to orbit too close to its primary, since the tidal forces would pull it apart.) Since locking a planet into synchronous rotation takes time, and won't happen for a distant planet, you can experiment with planets with all sorts of day lengths. Each, of course, will affect the lives of things that live there. The day-tonight temperature variation, for example, will be far greater on a planet where daylight and night each last a month than on one where they last an hour.
Axial tilt is the main cause of seasons, as shown in figure 3-5. Since the rotational axis always leans in the same direction as the planet goes around its sun, during part of the year one hemisphere leans toward the sun and the other away from it, while half a year later the hemispheres' situations are reversed. The hemisphere leaning toward the sun has “summer,” with long days and high temperatures, while the other has “winter,” with short days and low temperatures. The variation between summer and winter conditions is most extreme at the poles and least at the equator. That fact is the most important difference between arctic and tropic regions, with temperate zones lying between.
Other factors can influence seasons, of course. Ishtar, in Poul Anderson's Fire Time, orbits close to one star while a red giant orbits both in a highly eccentric orbit with a period of about a thousand years. Life there has had to adapt to prolonged periods of extreme heat at long intervals (whenever the red giant gets close), and anyone seriously interested in advanced world-building and the creation of exotic aliens would be well advised to study how it achieves that. For more prosaic situations, with a more or less Earthlike planet in orbit around a single star, axial tilt is by far the most important consideration. Even if the orbit is not quite circular, the variations caused by changing distance from the sun are small compared to those caused by the changing angle of sunlight.
FIGURE 3-5 Axial tilt is the main cause of seasons. Here we see (not to scale!) a planet circling a sun with its axis of rotation tilted to the right by an angle θ from the perpendicular to the orbital plane. One latitude line, in the northern (“upper”) hemisphere is shown. When the planet is at the rightmost position, that line spends most of its time in the dark region (winter), while in the leftmost position it spends most of its time in the sun (summer). In the intermediate positions, all parts of the planet spend equal parts of the day in light and darkness (the spring and fall equinoxes). In the southern hemisphere, the seasons are opposite those of the north, but for the same reasons.
Earth's axial tilt is 23.5°; others in the Solar System range from essentially 0 to more than 90°. (The “90 + ” planet, Uranus, is effectively lying on its side and rolling “backward.”) If you imagine tilts other than those shown in figure 3-5, you can see why changing the tilt would be so important. With no tilt, every part of the planet would get equal amounts of daylight and night, with the sun climbing to the same maximum angle above the horizon every day of the year. There would be no seasons, and there might be side effects such as aridity in the middle latitudes that are our temperate zones, since our temperate water supplies depend heavily on the spring melt of winter snow.
If you doubled Earth's tilt, to 47°, not only would seasonal variations be much more extreme, but odd things would happen to climatic zones. The counterparts of our Tropic of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn (the highest latitudes at which the sun is ever directly overhead) would move out to 47° north and south, while the arctic and antarctic circles (the lowest latitudes at which the sun is ever above or below the horizon for a full day or more) would move down to 43°. Thus there would be no temperate zones at all, and the belt between 43° and 47° in each hemisphere would combine some of the harshest features of tropical and arctic regions!
Those examples serve as a good reminder of one of the most common mistakes to avoid in creating a world: the world that is “all jungle” or “all swamp” or “perpetually spring everywhere.” Even as small a planet as Earth is, in human terms, a very large and immensely varied thing. Any real world will be, and any fictional world you want taken seriously had better be, too. Even a planet with no axial tilt, and therefore no seasons as we know them, will be far from homogeneous. Sunlight may arrive at the same angle every day at any point on the surface, but that angle will vary drastically with latitude. The equator will still be the hottest and the poles the coldest places, other things being equal.
Of course, other things won't necessarily be equal. Regional climates will also vary with things like elevation, atmospheric circulation patterns, the location and nature of bodies of water, geothermal activity, and the size and shape of mountain ranges. These in turn are influenced by things like surface gravity and escape velocity—which, though related, are not the same, or even proportional. (Surface gravity, again taking Earth's values as units, is g = dD, where d is the average density and D the diameter of the planet. Escape velocity, the minimum speed at which you have to launch something to keep gravity from pulling it back, is approximately  [M in this case referring to the planet.])
By now you should have a good feel for just how complicated a world is. I've given you some rudimentary tools for determining its most fundamental characteristics and shown you something of how they're interrelated, so you can't pick them in random combinations. If you want to develop your world in depth (as I hope you will, at least occasionally), you'll need more details and more tools than I can give you here. The References give a number of useful sources. The two Anderson articles have the special virtue of gathering some useful tools in one place (graphs in one article, equivalent formulas in the other) and working through a concrete example that was used in an actual science fiction story. Hal Clement's article “Whirligig World” similarly works through the development of Mesklin for Mission of Gravity.
Since these fields are changing so fast, some material in any book will have been superseded by more recent findings. Probably the single most useful source in my References is Stephen L. Gil-lett's World-Building, which is being written concurrently with this one. It is the most up to date, the most comprehensive, and the most specifically geared to the needs of science fiction writers. I also call your attention to the software packages listed, and urge you to watch for new ones as they become available. If you have access to a computer (as most writers now do), it may enable you to easily do exact calculations that just a few years ago would have been approached by mere educated guesswork. Some of them even let you play with possibilities—for example, trying slightly different values for a planet's location, size and mass, and quickly seeing a lot of the ramifications.
The aspects of world-building I've talked about in this chapter are independent of what, if anything, lives there—which is, of course, our primary concern in this book. What can live on a planet is very much shaped by the physical parameters we've been talking about—things like insolation, planetary temperature, surface gravity, and so on. From here on out we will assume that you've determined those things, to the extent of your ability and interest, and will then consider how your planet's characteristics shape its inhabitants.
And vice versa—for once a planet has life, that life can play an important role in shaping the world's further development. The large amount of free oxygen in Earth's atmosphere, for example, is almost certainly a consequence, not a cause, of life. And the effects that its one self-styled intelligent species (us) is having are currently a source of acute concern to scientists and politicians alike.
So the next thing we must do is look at life itself. What is it, and, given a world with particular characteristics, what forms can it take? That question has at least two parts, chemical and mechanical—and the chemical part comes first.
