---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0006.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["alien", "story", "one", "science", "human", "being", "fiction", "might", "writing", "would", "may", "book", "world", "thing", "u", "writer", "way", "could", "write", "much", "get", "think", "make", "first", "life"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0006html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 1
Why Write About Aliens?
Aliens—nonhuman beings, usually intelligent and sentient, usually from places other than Earth—are one of the most familiar elements of science fiction. Even people who don't read science fiction have, in recent years, become well acquainted with quite a few of them through television shows and movies. “E.T.” was the title character of one of the highest-grossing movies ever made; the Star Wars movies popularized wookies, Yoda and Jabba the Hut; Star Trek offered a steady parade of nonhuman life-forms, some of them as regular members of the cast.
Movies have been dealing with aliens for much longer, of course. Invasions of giant spiders and such have long been a staple of low-budget horror films, while occasionally a film would try something a bit more sophisticated, like the Martian invasion based on H.G. Wells's War of the Worlds. The same novel also inspired Orson Welles's 1938 radio broadcast that literally terrified thousands of listeners.
Printed science fiction has also featured a great many aliens, often with more care and finesse than they've usually received in the visual and broadcast media. Wells I've already mentioned; many others spring readily to mind—Stanley G. Weinbaum's Tweel (in “A Martian Odyssey”), for example, and the several varieties of Venusian who inhabited what Isaac Asimov called “the most perfect example of an alien ecology ever constructed” (in “Parasite Planet” and “The Lotus Eaters”), back in the early 1930s. The shape-changer in A.E. van Vogt's “Vault of the Beast” came along a few years later.
Some writers have made a specialty of creating fascinating, believable aliens, along with their cultures and the worlds that produced them. Hal Clement is famous for beings as diverse as the one in Needle, who takes up residence inside a human being, and the Mesklinites, adapted to a rapidly spinning world with extremely high gravity. Poul Anderson has created a wealth of worlds peopled with beings who clearly belong there. Some recent aliens hail from still more exotic locales, such as the neutron star in Robert L. Forward's Dragon's Egg.
Intelligent, sentient nonhumans have been an important element in human literature much longer than what we now know as science fiction. Gods, demons and talking animals appear in the most ancient mythologies. The folklores of many lands have produced elves, dragons and trolls that have persisted in some form into the written fantasy of today.
These beings clearly have a certain kinship to the aliens of science fiction, yet there are important differences as well. Those differences will constitute much of the subject of this book.
BASIC QUESTIONS
To get things started, let's consider these two questions:
1. What are “aliens"?
2. Why would anyone want to write about them?
For the moment, I will define aliens simply as nonhuman beings who can, to one degree or another, think, feel and act. You will immediately note a couple of things about that definition that will make us both want to put some additional limitations on it as we get deeper into the subject. First, it's awfully broad; second, its boundaries are rather fuzzy. As it stands, it could apply to virtually any nonhuman animal on Earth, as well as any that might exist elsewhere.
This is not necessarily a bad thing. When I was growing up, a book that exerted considerable influence on my later thinking was Masked Prowler, the biography of a raccoon, told from the raccoon's viewpoint. The world a raccoon lives in is sufficiently different from yours or mine to illustrate much of what I'll say about imagining and writing about aliens. So could many other Earthly species—especially if they turn out to be different from the way we've traditionally pictured them.
Quite a few animals have been doing just that in recent years, and at least one of the “aliens” I'll discuss later is something that we've long known lives right here on our own planet. For that matter, some “aliens” can be offshoots of humanity itself—isolated populations of human beings molded by alien circumstances into something quite different from what we're used to (such as the culture that must practice cannibalism in Donald Kingsbury's novel Courtship Rite). Contrary to the old saying, you can change human nature. If you change it enough, doubt can arise as to whether human or alien is the more apt term.
For the moment, let's allow the vagueness to stand and acknowledge that aliens could include raccoons and robots, gods and devils and humanity's own descendants, as easily as space travelers from other solar systems. Why would you want to write about any of these nonhuman beings, particularly if you believe, as William Faulkner once claimed, that, “The human heart in conflict with itself is the only subject worth writing about"?
As it happens, I don't agree with Faulkner. I'd modify his statement to say that the human heart in conflict with itself is one of many things worth writing about. But even writers who might agree completely with Faulkner have often written about nonhuman beings. One obvious reason for doing so is that such beings can act as a mirror for human foibles. In Aesop's fables, talking animals serve as stand-ins to model common human traits, implicitly inviting human readers to think about them without taking them personally.
In more modern, complex and sophisticated stories, such an approach might be useful if a writer wishes to get his readers to think about a theme so controversial in his own society that setting his story there would either get it banned or generate too much emotion to allow rational thought. As I write this, abortion is a good example of such a topic. It's being so hotly debated in real life that a contemporary novel about it is likely to make one set of readers applaud it (for echoing their own views) and another condemn it, while neither group does any real thinking about it. But if you create a believable alien society in which parallel problems arise naturally, a reader might think about them from a new perspective—and then recognize how his thoughts might apply to his own society's problems. Similarly, the relationships between the sexes are a highly charged area, so you might hold a mirror up to them by writing about beings whose relationships work differently, as Ursula K. Le Guin did in The Left Hand of Darkness. (The Gethenians have much in common with humans, but have a sexual cycle in which any individual may become sometimes male, sometimes female.)
One of the earliest reasons for telling stories about nonhuman beings was the widespread urge to explain natural phenomena. Peoples all over the world developed myths to explain things like storms and droughts and the very existence of the world and its peoples. Obviously somebody had to do these things that were beyond human capabilities, so they postulated gods and demons.
Many people today no longer feel the need for such anthropomorphic explanations. Science has provided a new set, based on the operations of natural laws that simply are, whether or not one believes in animate beings which are in some sense responsible for them. But far from destroying the urge to speculate about non-human and extraterrestrial beings, science has provided a new and powerful motivation. As we shall see later, those natural laws provide a new and uniquely compelling basis for suspecting that non-human intelligences and civilizations actually exist, and may even be common, elsewhere in the universe.
Human imaginations are mightily tickled by actual evidence that we are not alone in the universe. If there are other civilizations out there, what are they like? Are they a threat to us? Could they talk to us, or even visit? Why haven't they visited us already—or have they? Science fiction, aided by science, tries to imagine possible answers to such questions.
If they are out there, and if understanding natural law enables us to make educated guesses about what they may be like, aliens are no longer just a convenient literary device for holding a mirror to humanity. They are a real possibility, interesting in their own right. Some writers are drawn to aliens because they have glimpsed some of the possibilities and find it a fascinating intellectual and emotional exercise to try to imagine some of the kinds of aliens that might exist—and how they might someday interact with us.
Those same natural laws also suggest that that is a real possibility, and could happen at any time. If so, it would be a good idea to have thought about the possible ramifications before we are faced with the urgent need to minimize the dangers and maximize the opportunities in such a contact.
POTENTIAL STARTING POINTS
The relatively recent desire to speculate scientifically on the possible nature of aliens and alien worlds is a new reason for writing about them, but it does not replace the older reasons. A writer may still wish to set up a “thought experiment” to model some problem of human relationships—but now he may simultaneously seek to make those aliens believable and intrinsically interesting. His primary interest and emphasis may be on either aspect, or he may strive to give equal attention to both. And either may come first in the development of the story.
Sometimes, as in the case of Hal Clement's Mesklinites or Robert L. Forward's neutron star dwellers, the germ of the story lies in an author's recognition that a certain type of world can exist. Thinking about its physical characteristics suggests things about how life might develop there, for the kinds of life that can evolve in a place are strongly shaped by the conditions that prevail there. The way life develops in turn shapes the way civilization develops—and the kinds of stories that can take place there. A writer with a strong interest in world-building may start by creating an interesting world, letting life and civilization develop there, and letting its natural beings generate a plot.
Another writer might start instead with a general idea of a story line that requires aliens with certain general characteristics, and fill in the outline enough to make the story “feel real.” Sometimes, if that's what you're doing, you can get by with relatively little attention to the scientific background—but the result will probably feel less real. The writing is, at least in my opinion, also more fun that way. The factors that shape ecologies and civilizations are fascinating, and one of the pleasures of writing science fiction is that it gives you a good excuse to dabble in a wide range of fields.
But there's one more compelling reason to take a close look at how your aliens work and how they got that way. The better you understand them, the more likely it is that the things you learn in working out their background will suggest aspects of your plot that you wouldn't have thought of otherwise—and that are better than you would have thought of otherwise.
I might humbly offer an example from my own experience. (Author's note: I will sometimes use my own stories as examples of how a story developed. It's not that I have any specially high regard for my own stories, but simply that I can speak with much more authority about how they were created than about anybody else's!) My first novel, The Sins of the Fathers, grew out of two main ideas:
1. Entire galactic cores sometimes explode in a way that would make planets uninhabitable throughout the galaxy. Our galaxy could have suffered such a catastrophe at any time in the last 30,000 years, and we wouldn't know it until the first radiation reached us.
2. If the Earth were about to become uninhabitable and aliens offered to rescue us, should we accept their offer?
Ben Bova, the first editor I approached with the idea (and who eventually bought it), pointed out in our first meeting that a key question was going to be, “Why are they making this offer?” To answer that, I had to come up with believable motivations—believable, that is, in terms of the aliens' psychology. That required me to get to know how their psychology worked, and since their psychology was shaped by their evolution and history, I had to think about those. Furthermore, since the galactic core is a long way from Earth, I needed to know what kind of technology they were using that could let them get here in time to give us advance warning. Then I had to work out the detailed chronology of the events leading up to that story. At one point in that process I was horrified to discover a 30,000-year discrepancy in the chronology—so I invented some new physics to account for it. The implications of that new physics wound up generating some of the best parts of the story.
Every time I figured out an answer to a background question that had to be this way or that, it forced the story in directions that I could never have anticipated otherwise. And the end result was a far stronger story than I had originally expected to write.
GOALS OF THIS BOOK
If you're reading this book, I assume that you are interested in writing science fiction and would sometimes like to use aliens in your stories, for one or more of the reasons I've mentioned (or perhaps others that I haven't). I further assume that you don't want to write about just any aliens, but would like yours to be believable and memorable. This book is intended as a guide to help you do that.
It is not intended to be a comprehensive compilation of everything you might ever need to know to create and write well about aliens. I've already hinted that writing science fiction will likely lead you into corners of the library you never expected to visit. (In one morning of editing, I once found myself writing to authors about mountain climbing techniques, the physics of atmospheres, grammatical details in Jamaican dialect and the construction and playing of tubas!) What I will try to provide is a good guide to the principles involved—the kinds of things that you will have to think about as a matter of course when creating any aliens. Once you have created your aliens, some special problems may arise in telling their story, and I will also try to provide some assistance with those. In connection with both creating and writing, I will direct you to some good examples of what has worked for other writers and reference sources to which you might go when you need more help or more detail on a particular subject. (The “Xenologist's Bookshelf” at the end of the book provides bibliographic information to help you locate all references cited.)
Finally, I should emphasize right up front that this book will, for the most part, limit itself to more or less plausible aliens. Or, to put it another way, I am addressing my comments to readers who are interested in writing science fiction rather than fantasy. You may think that science fiction and fantasy are more or less equivalent—for which you can hardly be blamed, since in recent years there has been a sneaky movement afoot to treat them as interchangeable. There is, in fact, a somewhat fuzzy boundary between them with some room for debate about where the boundary lies and on which side of it some works fall. But, as an astute observer of human foibles once observed, “The fact that there's twilight doesn't mean you can't tell the difference between night and day.”
In this book, a fundamental assumption will be that there is an important difference between stories that are clearly science fiction and those that are clearly fantasy. We will be primarily concerned with the former. Science fiction writers try to deal with things that are, or can be made to seem, plausible. For the particular purposes of this book, that means one of our first concerns will be to make our aliens and their societies plausible.
And that, of course, leads us directly to that big, fundamental, and somewhat thorny question: What is plausible?
