---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0010.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["one", "animal", "may", "like", "way", "many", "need", "would", "intelligence", "body", "much", "organism", "life", "could", "use", "time", "two", "must", "get", "human", "earth", "kind", "might", "example", "different"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0010html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 5
Engineering Organisms
Alien Bodies and Minds
It is perfectly possible to write about plausible aliens who are essentially indistinguishable from human beings. After all, we're the one type of intelligent being that we know is possible. However, we also know that we evolved to fit particular conditions found on one planet, and that changing a number here or there in the astronomical description of a planet can change surface conditions dramatically. Since a planet is described by many parameters, each of which can vary through a wide range, the planets in any galaxy should offer a great variety of living conditions. We should not expect very many of them to produce life-forms that look much like us. Or should we?
CONVERGENT EVOLUTION
In the May and June 1939 issues of Astounding, a two-part article (“Design for Life”) by L. Sprague de Camp looked at life from an engineering point of view, considering not only how life has developed on Earth but also what living things have to do and what engineering principles determine how those things can be done. He concluded that any intelligent being that evolved on any more or less Earthlike planet will probably be at least vaguely humanoid. Some of his assumptions need a bit of revision in light of more recent knowledge, but much of his reasoning holds up surprisingly well more than fifty years later. Could it be that we really should expect most intelligent aliens, at least from Earthlike planets, to look like us? Or is this another case where the conclusion is influenced by the fact that the speculator happens to be of the form he finds most plausible?
My personal guess is: a bit of both. The fact that we have spent all our lives on a planet where “our kind of people” have evolved and become dominant probably does make it harder for us to see alternative possibilities that might exist elsewhere. On the other hand, de Camp is quite right that there are some compelling reasons for believing that similar environments will produce similar life.
The first such line of reasoning is the empirical observation that precisely that has happened over and over in widely separated but similar environments on Earth. Biologists call it convergent evolution: two independent evolutionary paths leading to end points that look alike. De Camp cites the example of largish swimming animals. There are many, many species of such critters now, and there used to be even more. They belong to quite distinct lines of evolution—fish, reptiles, birds, mammals—yet they all have similarly streamlined body shapes.
The similarities are even more striking if you divide “swimmers” into subclasses depending on how they swim—e.g., “scullers” such as porpoises, ichthyosaurs, swordfish and sharks, all swim by waving a fin at the back end of the body while steering and stabilizing with other fins. De Camp identifies three such methods of swimming, and points out that virtually all largish aquatic animals use one of them, and have the general type of body shape that goes with that method.
Similar examples abound, sometimes involving whole collections of traits that may or may not be obviously related. South America has a family of birds called jacamars; Africa has a different family called bee-eaters. Even though the two families evolved independently, they have so many obvious similarities in both appearance and behavior (both types of birds catch insects on the wing and batter them to death against branches) that they're likely to strike even an untrained and not particularly interested observer as being related.
Why should this be? Why should only a few methods be used by all the many animals that have to propel a bulky body through water? Why should widely separated families of birds both look and act alike in so many ways?
In the case of the jacamars, I don't know. It's not obvious to me why there should be quite so many parallels. Why, for example, should the kind of color scheme favored by bee-eaters and jacamars so often go with their kinds of lifestyle? Probably there is a reason that simply hasn't occurred to me; jacamars, bee-eaters and probably some people who have written Ph.D. theses about them know more about what they're doing than I do.
The case of the swimmers is more straightforward, and leads us to the other line of reasoning that supports the expectation that similar environments produce similar life. The first was the simple observation that convergent evolution does occur. The second is the reason why it has to occur: Life that evolves is subject to the same engineering principles as any machine that's designed.
Evolution is an inefficient engineer; it depends far more on trial and error than any human engineer would be allowed to. But the ultimate requirement for both is the same: The product must work. It does not have to work perfectly, but simply well enough to compete successfully against whatever else is out there. No doubt you're painfully aware that this is true in industrial engineering: How many products that you buy represent truly optimal design and construction? It's especially true of evolution. An organism that can already use an available food source more successfully than anything else that's trying has no need to do it any better. (In fact, it might ultimately be an evolutionary disadvantage for it to do so. If it exploits its resources too efficiently, it may wipe out the supply and thus itself. Our own species could become a prime example of this, if it's not careful.)
Also, since evolution works so slowly, there's always a “phase lag” in its reactions to environmental changes. Most of the organisms in the early part of an ice age will be struggling to survive with equipment developed for warmer conditions. If the ice age lasts long enough, flora and fauna may eventually evolve that are well suited to the cold—but they will then be poorly adapted to the warmth when the ice age ends.
Either evolution or engineering will tend to produce devices (of which organisms are a special case) that are at least reasonably good at what they have to do. The ones that aren't will be squeezed out by others that are better; both evolution and engineers are constantly trying new designs. Whether or not a design works is determined by the same physical principles that govern everything else in the physical universe. For example, animals that live by swimming must be able to move rapidly through the water without wasting too much energy. A porpoise shaped like a porpoise can do this; a rectangular block cannot. Thus you find no rectangular swimmers, but many that are streamlined.
As an example of how pervasively an engineering principle shapes life, let's look at one particularly important principle and some of its biological consequences.
THE SQUARE-CUBE LAW
If you scale the linear dimensions of any object up (or down) by a particular factor, any area associated with it is scaled up or down by that factor squared, while its volume is scaled up or down by that factor cubed. For example, if you consider a glass sphere one centimeter in diameter, a sphere of the same glass two centimeters in diameter will have four times the surface area and eight times the volume.
In itself, this might seem a mere curiosity; but it has profound practical implications for life. Anything about the sphere that is proportional to area will also be changed by the linear scale factor squared, and anything proportional to volume will be changed by the scale factor cubed. For example, the amount of paint needed to cover the two-centimeter sphere is four times that for the one-centimeter, but the two-centimeter sphere weighs eight times as much as the one-centimeter.
Many quantities important to life come in related pairs, one proportional to the square and the other to the cube of the linear size. Since the two quantities of the pair don't change by the same factor when the size is changed, you cannot simply change the size of an organism arbitrarily, keeping everything else the same.
For example, consider body mass and strength. Humans often marvel that some insects can jump many times their own body length—but we could, too, if we were scaled down to insect size. A man might be 180 cm tall and a cricket 1.8 cm long. A 1.8 cm man—that is, a man scaled down by a linear factor of one hundred but otherwise constructed exactly like a normal man—would have one ten-thousandth the strength (proportional to cross-sectional area of arm and leg muscles and bones), but only one-millionth the weight (proportional to total volume). Thus he would have a hundred times as much force available to lift each gram of his body, and naturally could jump much farther.
If, that is, he could live at all. Unfortunately for our would-be Lilliputian, strength and weight are not the only things affected by scale change and the square-cube law. Reducing volume and hence mass by a factor of one million means there's that much less bio-mass that has to be kept supplied with food and oxygen; but it also means that the rate of heat loss by radiation from the skin is only reduced by a factor of ten thousand. Thus each gram of that little body is losing heat one hundred times as fast as each gram of a full-sized man. Since functioning as a human being requires maintaining a constant temperature of 37°C, the little guy, other things being equal, is going to have to eat and breathe one hundred times as much per gram as you or I. We might eat a fiftieth of our body weight in a day; scaled down by one hundred, we would have to eat twice our body weight—and have our breathing and pulse rates correspondingly speeded up to get enough oxygen in to oxidize all that food. This is why mice, shrews and songbirds have such high metabolic rates (“to eat like a bird” isn't at all what the colloquial usage implies!) and why you don't find warm-blooded critters much smaller than those.
There are other problems, too. Humans are composed of very large numbers of very small cells. If you try to scale one down by changing every linear measurement by the same factor of one hundred, this means that each cell is scaled down by that factor. Since no cells on Earth are anywhere near that small—all the cells on Earth only vary over about one order of magnitude in mass—we must suspect that cells of the required complexity can't be made that small with the materials used by Earthly life. Thus our tiny man would have far fewer cells of all types—including nerve cells. Since intelligence depends on having lots of nerve cells and lots of connections among them, the little man could not have anything like human intelligence.
While we're on the subject of cells, what does the square-cube law imply about the possibility of very large single-celled creatures, such as the “giant amoebas” sometimes found running amok in early science fiction? Their prospects are not good. A cell is essentially a bag of fluid. Make it very big, and the membrane can no longer support the contents. At best, such a creature will sprawl flat, effectively immobilized; at worst, the cell wall will rupture, spilling the contents out into a puddle. Thus we can expect macroscopic life-forms to be multicellular, wherever they occur. (Unless the environment itself provides lots of support—see William P. Ja-cobs's article for an exception in Earth's oceans.)
Meanwhile, back at that insect… how about the horror movie cliché of insects or spiders the size of horses or tanks wreaking havoc on the landscape? An insect-sized man could do dazzling athletic feats, but it works the other way, too. A man-sized insect couldn't even stand up. Scale its linear dimensions up by one hundred, and its legs can support ten thousand times the weight—but the new insect has a million times the weight. It also has additional problems. Most insects have extremely simple respiratory systems, consisting of a few tubes letting oxygen flow to the tissues where it's needed and carbon dioxide flow away. Such a system can't supply oxygen, and remove carbon dioxide, fast enough for an organism much bigger than the insects we have—that is, a few inches long.
There are, of course, special ways you might get around some of these problems. You can't simply scale up an insect a hundredfold without changing anything else—but that doesn't mean you can't have something that looks like an insect that size. It simply means that if you're going to do that, you have to make other changes to compensate.
The strength problem might be overcome by making the “insect” of sterner stuff—material with a much higher strength-to-mass ratio than what real insects are made of. To make this believable in a story, you'll have to imagine a way that your world has been able to evolve superior materials that four billion years of evolution haven't produced on Earth, or else assume that your insects are artificial creations of a technological civilization that's very good at materials science.
The respiratory problem you might solve by assuming that while the exterior looks the same, the innards are very different. Much greater efficiency could be achieved by using lungs or gills to aerate a very large surface, and a heart to circulate the gases to and from cells via pumped blood. Some prehistoric swamps sported dragon-flies much bigger than any of their contemporary kin, but they could only get away with it because the air was denser then.
This little discussion of the square-cube law has served as a good illustration of how a simple physical principle can have far-reaching implications for every aspect of life. In this case, what it boils down to is that different mechanisms can serve a particular purpose, but each only works well in a certain size range. As a science fiction writer, you will be interested in all kinds of life, since any world you create will have many ecological niches to be filled. However, you will probably have a special interest in intelligent forms; so before surveying the kinds of problems that all life must solve, and the various means that can be used to solve them, we should look at some of the special requirements for intelligent life.
INTELLIGENCE AND THE ALTERNATIVES
The most basic special requirement for an intelligent species is a nervous system of sufficient size and complexity, which in turn puts some restrictions on possible size of an intelligent organism. The nature of intelligence will impose some other requirements, or at least guidelines, so this is a good time to ponder the questions: What is intelligence, and why should anything develop it?
Intelligence is, as L. Sprague de Camp put it, “an annoyingly vague term”—and a science fiction writer probably wouldn't want it any other way. One of the interesting kinds of things we can do in this field is speculate on different kinds of intelligence and different ways it might come about. (For an unusual fictional approach to the latter, see “Bluff,” by Harry Turtledove.) So we wouldn't want to be limited by too narrow a definition.
We needn't look far to see that there are different kinds of intelligence, right here on Earth and even within our own species. We've all known people who were great at math but couldn't spell, or who wrote wonderful poetry but couldn't balance a checkbook. When I was teaching physics at a small college, I even saw amazing variations in how different students thought about the same physics problems.
Still, we will need at least an approximate definition of intelligence, and for that it would be helpful to have some examples of things that we would call something else. Let's define intelligence as including one or both of the following: the ability to learn by experience, and the ability to reason abstractly. The first of these can alternatively be thought of as forming conditioned reflexes in response to new stimuli; the second, as thinking about things that are not present and reaching conclusions that can be appropriately applied when they are present.
One might be tempted to include a host of other things as aspects of intelligence, such as self-awareness and emotion. For now, at least, let's treat those not as essential ingredients, but as special qualities that may be attached to particular intelligences. Trying to imagine intelligences that lack one or both can be an interesting science-fictional exercise. Emmett McDowell imagined a race without emotion (and found an evolutionary advantage in it) in “Veiled Island.” Recent science fiction, spurred by real research on artificial intelligence, has imagined many computer programs that become self-aware, but can you imagine an intelligence that is not—i.e., that thinks intelligently about everything in its environment, but has no concept of itself as an independent player?
Intelligence is essentially a way for an organism to make decisions about what to do to solve the day-to-day problems of survival. For most organisms, those problems mostly fall into two categories: how to get food, and how to avoid becoming somebody else's food. For something that lives entirely in one place, like a dandelion or an oyster, those problems are simple. The dandelion simply absorbs light from the Sun and nutrients from the soil; the oyster opens its shell and lets currents bring food to it when not threatened, and closes its shell when it senses something might be about to eat it. Neither strategy is completely effective; some individuals of both types do get eaten, but their species survive by making many individuals. Intelligence would be of little or no value to a dandelion or an oyster, since neither is equipped to do anything different from its basic routine.
Something that can do something about threats or opportunities has an advantage; hence many organisms, mostly animals, have developed the ability to move around. A rabbit can run from a fox; a fox can pounce on a rabbit if it can sneak close enough.
A creature that can move needs a way to decide when, how far, in what direction and how fast to move. For most mobile animals, decisions are based on instinct, which is a simpler kind of programming than intelligence. Instinct may be thought of as “hard-wired” programming, built right into the organism, operational from birth and not subject to change. A baby snake, for example, fends for itself from the instant it is born or hatched. It drinks, catches and eats smaller animals, and flees when pursued just as an adult of its species does. For things that live simple, unchanging lives, instinct works fine and doesn't require an extremely complicated nervous system.
The next step up is “Type 1 intelligence,” or the ability to form conditioned reflexes. This could, for example, enable a cow to learn to avoid an electric fence after being shocked a few times, even though cows never encountered electric fences until recently and so have no built-in instincts about them. Humans tend to think of this as a “primitive” form of intelligence, more characteristic of “lower” animals than themselves, but they use it, too. Learning to drive a car or play the piano is largely a matter of conditioning reflexes. A beginner has to think about every move and does them awkwardly, while an old pro does them automatically and much more smoothly.
Nonetheless, 'Type 2 intelligence,” or abstract reasoning, is what we think of as most characteristically and distinctly human. (Until recently, many of us rather arrogantly, if naively, claimed this as completely unique to humans, but it's become hard to deny that at least a few other species, such as chimpanzees and dolphins, do it too.) This kind of intelligence confers adaptability, allowing beings that possess it to figure out solutions to problems neither they nor their ancestors have ever faced before. Thus an intelligent being has a better chance of surviving a climate change or extending its range into regions for which it is not physically well-suited. Our own ancestors have demonstrated both of these abilities.
There is little evolutionary incentive for organisms to develop abilities, especially abilities that require complex physical equipment, unless those abilities significantly enhance their survival capabilities. Intelligence seems most likely to do this for an animal that moves around in an environment that poses many and varied challenges. De Camp considered this much more likely to happen on land than in the oceans; he considered the oceans to be too monotonous an environment to provide enough stimulus. (If the cetaceans [whales and dolphins] are as bright as they seem, this might be attributed to strides they made when their ancestors lived on land, as they apparently did for quite a while. Of course, that doesn't explain the octopus, which also shows considerable cleverness….) In the case of our own remote ancestors, experience living in trees probably helped.
Since evolution proceeds by building on old traits, either modifying them or adding new ones, possessors of abstract intelligence may also carry remnants of earlier types of programming, like instinct. (See Carl Sagan's The Dragons of Eden) One of their major recurring problems may be learning when to allow instinct to have its way, and when to let intelligence overrule it. (You would not want to stop and think about whether to pull your hand away from a hot stove; but neither would you want to trust instinct when landing an airplane, since most people's instincts tell them exactly the wrong thing to do in some situations.)
Intelligence allows a new capability that Alfred Korzybski called “time-binding": the ability to transmit learned information from generation to generation. This is crucial to the development of civilization, as it enables each generation to build on the accomplishments of its predecessors. Without it, each generation would have to learn everything for itself, repeating many of the mistakes of its ancestors, and none would have time to get very far. In humans, time-binding is achieved by having most of what we know taught by our ancestors during a long period of relative helplessness and dependency while growing up. This, of course, has far-reaching implications for the ways that human societies develop. But is it the only possible way?
Maybe not. A few years ago experiments were reported that seemed to show chemical transmission of learned behavior—e.g., flatworms that had learned to run a simple maze could be ground up and fed to “uneducated” flatworms, which would then show the same “learned” ability without going through the learning process. Attempts to repeat these experiments in other laboratories failed, and they came to be generally regarded as a false alarm. We still have no clear evidence of “chemical learning” in Earthly organisms, but it is not inconceivable that it has developed somewhere else. Marc Stiegler made fascinating use of this possibility in his novelette “Petals of Rose.”
PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS: A CATALOG OF OPTIONS
We're now ready to survey the kinds of problems life must deal with, and some of the possible solutions that have been dreamed up by Earthly evolution and/or science fiction writers. I'll list quite a few of these as if they were separate, but over and over you'll see how they interact—i.e., the way chosen to solve one problem affects the ways available to solve others.
Unicellular or Multicellular?
Probably every world will have many single-celled organisms, in terms of both individuals and species. (Unless some civilization has made a very determined effort to get rid of them and to find another way to fulfill their functions—e.g., on Earth, blue-green algae play a large role in maintaining atmosphere oxygen.) However, as we've seen, single cells are quite limited in how big they can be and what they can do. So worlds that have only single-celled life (which may be common) will probably not be very interesting to human explorers (except perhaps as prospects for terraforming) or readers. On worlds of most interest, all but the simplest life-forms, and in particular any we'd call intelligent, will probably be multicellular.
Size
I've already said quite a bit about this in my discussion of the square-cube law, but there are still a few aspects that warrant special mention—e.g., what are the maximum and minimum sizes possible for A. organisms generally, and B. intelligent organisms?
Some bacteria of the genus Mycoplasma are smaller than 0.2 micrometer (or, if you prefer, a millionth of an inch, comparable to the wavelengths of visible light). Viruses are smaller, but are not unanimously considered truly alive, since they depend on other entities to carry out some of their life functions. At the other extreme we can find a variety of examples, depending on your additional requirements. On present-day Earth, the largest organisms are probably the giant trees of the genus Sequoia, which can reach heights exceeding 100 meters (or 300 feet). (Possible exception: Some fungi, long regarded as independent organisms, have recently been found to be mere parts of huge organisms that exist mostly underground.) Among contemporary animals, the largest is the blue whale (up to 30 meters or 100 feet in length), while the largest on land is the African elephant (up to 3.5 meters or 11 feet in height, but chubby, massing up to 6500 kg or 7 tons). Flying animals are much smaller, being limited to the 10 kg or so of condors and albatrosses.
Flying creatures are limited to much smaller sizes than land animals, and those in turn are much smaller than the biggest swimmers. That observation is highly significant for a science fiction writer, and is related to another: In some prehistoric periods, creatures of land and air grew much bigger than they now do. Some of the dinosaurs grew to 30 or more meters in length, with masses many times that of any contemporary elephant; and pterosaurs (“flying dinosaurs”) have been found with bigger wingspans than many small airplanes. All of these facts illustrate that practical size limits depend on planetary conditions. The larger sizes of extinct land and air animals were apparently possible because their atmosphere was denser and richer in oxygen than ours, enabling a more efficient metabolism. Those that live exclusively in water can grow larger than on land because the buoyancy means they don't have to support their own full weight, as you can easily demonstrate for yourself in a swimming pool. However, it also means that they must stay in water. A beached whale is in serious trouble because it can't do basic things like breathing under the full force of gravity.
The full force of gravity, of course, can be more or less on other planets. On a planet with weak gravity, organisms would have something like the advantage whales get from water. Since the weight of every part (that is, the pull of gravity toward the ground) is less, the supporting structures don't need to be as strong as they would on a high-gravity world. Thus any type of thing—plants, animals, buildings—can be bigger and more graceful or “spindly” there. (See Martyn J. Fogg's article “On Beanpoles and Drum-Men.”) If you want things built like insects or spiders, but man-sized or larger, a low-gravity world is where you have the best chance of making them work. The Overlords in Arthur C. Clarke's Childhood's End, tall and thin and with exoskeletons, originated on such a world. Hal Clement's Mesklinites, on the other hand, having to deal with extremely powerful gravity, are small and built low to the ground, rather like a foot-long centipede. You wouldn't want to be tall on a high-gravity world, either: On a part of Mesklin where the gravity is fifty times that on Earth, falling six inches would be like falling twenty-five feet here!
One can imagine still larger organisms, such as the planetwide silicon-based organism in Joseph Green's Conscience Interplanetary or the 150-million-kilometer intelligent nebula in Fred Hoyle's The Black Cloud. Those are getting beyond the scope of this chapter, but we'll take another look at such things in chapter eleven.
Restricting ourselves for now to life based on what we would consider more “ordinary” biochemistry, we return briefly to the question of what special constraints intelligence puts on possible sizes. I've already discussed reasons for suspecting that humanlike intelligence can't occur in a body built along the same general lines if that body is much smaller than ours. L. Sprague de Camp's guess of forty or fifty pounds as a lower limit for an adult being of humanlike intelligence is probably as reasonable as any, at least in an Earthlike environment. My personal inclination would be to make it a bit smaller for the simple reason that scientifically careful guesses of limits have so often proved too conservative—there may well be an alternate way of doing something that we haven't thought of. This was part of my reasoning when I made the “chucks” in Tweedlioop comparable in both size and appearance to large Earthly rodents. (A more important reason, though, was that I wanted to play with the psychology of humans reacting to aliens that looked as if they belonged here but didn't, and those were the most convenient animals available in the setting I chose to use. I knew it very well, and in fact the opening scene of Tweedlioop was directly suggested by an encounter with a very real and slightly odd red squirrel.)
Very different environments may change the limits considerably. The neutron star dwellers in Robert L. Forward's Dragon's Egg (see chapter eleven) are much smaller than we are—but everything is necessarily much more compact there. Also, the embryonic field of nanotechnology suggests that artificial intelligences can be made far smaller than anything emerging from our kind of “natural” evolution—and it's entirely possible that some “aliens” we meet may be “artificial.”
As for an upper size limit, it's hard to imagine a nervous system being intrinsically too big and complex to do whatever it needs to do. De Camp and Anderson put forth reasons for suspecting that intelligent land animals capable of building a civilization are not likely to be much bigger than a grizzly bear—say a ton or so. On the other hand, G. David Nordley has created in great detail a fascinating and believable race of extremely large amphibious intelligences, the Do'utians, for his 'Trimus” stories. Fully aquatic beings can get quite large, and Earth's whales seem to show more signs of high intelligence the more we look at them.
Respiration
We've already established that if oxygen, hydrogen, chlorine or some other gas is available for use in highly efficient oxidizing or reducing reactions, an organism that uses it will get far more from its food than one that doesn't. Therefore, while primitive organisms using less efficient chemistry will survive in some niches, as they have on Earth, we can reasonably expect all but the most primitive to use the most efficient chemistry available where they live.
To get the oxygen (or hydrogen, or whatever) to their cells, larger organisms need more elaborate respiratory systems than small ones. Single-celled creatures simply exchange gases through their cell walls. Small multicellular land dwellers can use simple networks of tubes that open to the outside, like the tracheae of insects. Some small fish and amphibians respire directly through their skins, though amphibians doing that on land must keep their skins moist.
None of those methods can supply enough incoming gas, or remove enough outgoing, to satisfy the needs of a very large and/ or active creature. Such creatures must therefore find a way to make the square-cube law work for them. They can do this by increasing the surface-to-volume ratio of the structures through which vital gases pass, and/or the rate at which gases are moved to and from those surfaces.
Aquatic animals on Earth do this with gills, branched or feathery structures with many small blood vessels near the surface. They may simply protrude from the body, as in some larval salamanders; or they may be enclosed in protective cavities, as in most fish. They may be exposed to an effective flow of water by the motion of swimming, or the animal may have means of forcibly pumping water over the gills. Either way, dissolved gases are exchanged between surrounding water and blood through the thin walls of the gill branches, circulated through the animal's body in the blood, and passed through the walls of blood vessels to and from other cells along the way. The same mechanical principles would work just as well for animals that live in some other liquid solvent.
Lungs, used by creatures of land and air to get the same result, can be thought of as “inside-out gills.” Gills pass a liquid over the outside of a repeatedly branched tissue structure; lungs draw gas into repeatedly branched hollow tubes, exchange gases with blood through the innerwalls  of those tubes, and expel an altered mixture of gases. Branching increases the surface area for gas exchange; breathing harder increases the rate at which gases are moved in and out.
Both lungs and gills can vary considerably in the complexity and details of their structure, and even in their number. Most snakes, for example, only have one functional lung. Both lungs and gills are mechanical devices for getting a large amount of gas into and out of the body as a whole, and depend on a circulatory system to get those gases to and from individual cells. That implies a system of blood vessels (veins, arteries and capillaries), one or more pumps (most of us in these parts have one heart, but a built-in spare or two could have advantages and might have evolved somewhere), and a circulatory fluid (blood). Blood itself is quite a complicated organ, containing several highly specialized structures. In us and our close relatives, oxygen is carried to cells by the molecule called hemoglobin, which gives our blood its red color. Other animals may use something else, and their blood need not be red. Some Earthly crustaceans and mollusks, for example, substitute the blue copper compound hemocyanin; but as a science fiction writer, you needn't limit yourself to compounds used by Earthly organisms. Those evolved elsewhere may find useful substitutes not even known to our chemists.
The kinds of respiratory and circulatory systems a creature needs will depend on the interaction of several variables. On an earlier Earth with a more concentrated atmosphere, simple tracheae sufficed for insects of a size that could not exist here and now. The centipede-like Mesklinites in Hal Clement's Mission of Gravity need no lungs and breathe hydrogen directly through skin pores because they are relatively small and they live in a dense atmosphere. Humans store little oxygen in their bodies and so must breathe frequently or die; seals and whales, which dive deeply, must have adaptations to let them go much longer between breaths. Giraffes, to get blood to heads that are five meters or more above the ground, must have a blood pressure that would kill a human—and that means they must also have very sturdy blood vessels (see J.W. Warren's article).
Eating
Another important function of a circulatory system is to distribute food to cells. What kind of food? That brings up a delicate but basic point: Every organism (except those at the bottom of the food chain, such as photosynthesizing plants) eats other organisms and eventually (barring artificial interference such as being mummified or sealed in a vault) gets eaten by still others. An ecosystem is a more or less stable collection of organisms that use different forms of energy to maintain a dynamic balance of the system as a whole. On the surface of Earth, solar energy is used directly by plants, herbivores use energy chemically stored in those plants, carnivores get theirs by eating herbivores, and ultimately they all get recycled back into plant nutrients.
Each organism occupies a unique niche in that web of relationships and in its environment. It needs certain kinds of equipment (i.e., anatomy and physiology) to fulfill the needs of any particular niche. Plants, mostly, don't “eat"; they just need chlorophyll and light-gathering surfaces to use it (though a few plants, such as Venus fly-traps, do eat small animals and have developed equipment for catching them). Animals eat either plants or other animals, and need means of catching and processing food.
Mouths take a wide variety of forms, depending on what they have to work on and what other requirements they have to be coordinated with. Many fishes' mouths are little more than holes large enough to gulp down a reasonable range of things smaller than their owners. Snakes seldom eat, and so must be able to handle prey larger than their own diameter if that's what's available. Lacking hands or feet to hold and manipulate their food, they use large numbers of small, backward-curved teeth to hold onto whatever they catch, and elastic skin and dislocatable jaws to accommodate oversized meals. Herbivores, like cattle and antelope, need teeth suited to cutting off plants and then crushing and chewing them. Carnivores, like cats, are better served by equipment for quick killing and tearing bite-size chunks off a carcass held down with paws.
An assortment of tooth shapes and sizes, together with manipulators that allow the gathering of many types of food, makes for an omnivore like you or me—with the advantages of versatility and adaptability. At the other extreme, some types of eating equipment become highly specialized. The native Hawaiian birds called honey-creepers evolved into several species, each with a different bill shape very well fitted to a particular narrow range of foods and useless for anything else. That's fine, as long as the required foods remain plentiful; but such specialization is risky in the long term, since environmental conditions do change.
Special features of eating equipment can be found beyond the mouth. Chickens, for example, must be fed not only food, but gravel to act as “internal teeth” in an organ called the crop. Cattle have multiple “stomachs” and regurgitate, rechew and reswallow food to get the most out of it.
How much food an organism needs varies and depends on several factors. Hummingbirds are small, active, warm-blooded and airborne, all of which increase their energy needs, making them eat almost constantly and consume amounts comparable to their own body weight every day. Snakes spend most of their time resting, are “cold-blooded,” and therefore need very little food. (One who has been living in my house for the past decade eats a couple of meals a week in her “hungry” season, and little or nothing—by her own choice—during the cold months.)
Getting Around—Or Not
My earlier discussion of intelligence suggests that it is unlikely to develop in plants since they stay pretty much fixed—and in general, I'd bet on that to be true. However, science fiction writers take statements like that as challenges. If you can imagine circumstances in which plants develop intelligence, you can also imagine that they would have a very different perspective on things. For a memorable fictional example, see the Hlutr, the pensive “trees” in Don Sakers's “The Leaves of October.” Plants aren't altogether static; if you doubt it, watch some time-lapse movies of plants growing, attaching themselves to supports, following the sun and blooming. The essential difference is that they do things very slowly. So if they were going to evolve intelligence, they would probably do it on a planet of a long-lived star (well toward the right on the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram) and their entire lives would be lived on a far less hurried time scale than ours.
How about active, mobile plants—beings that get their energy by photosynthesizing, yet move around like animals? In general, it doesn't work. In an Earthlike environment, a being of manlike size and shape could not photosynthesize nearly enough to meet its needs (see Hal Clement's “The Creation of Imaginary Beings” and V.A. Eulach's “Those Impossible Autotrophic Men”).
Again, as a science fiction writer you may well take such a generalization as a challenge, and if you're willing to work at it, you may succeed. You could, for example, put your beings' planet closer to a hotter sun, thereby letting them get enough energy from photosynthesis to support a mobile lifestyle—but bear in mind that such a change will dramatically affect the nature of everything that lives there. Or you could create an elaborate system like the one in Paul Ash's “Big Sword.” A being some six inches tall can move about, but spends much of his time basking to soak up sunlight through broad membranes filled with a very efficient photosynthesizing agent.
Developing something like that can become a major part of the story. For most purposes, your motile and/or intelligent aliens will probably be animals. How will they get around? Earth provides examples of numerous options, most of which have probably evolved in many other places to which they're well-suited.
One that Earth doesn't seem to have, at least at the multicellular level, is rolling on wheels. At least two explanations suggest themselves for this lack. First, since evolution works by successive modifications of preexisting structures, it's a little hard to see how an evolutionary branch might have gone from a multi-limb design to wheel-and-bearing in small steps; the basic forms are too fundamentally different. Second, rolling isn't a very efficient way to get around on most kinds of natural terrain. It works well on relatively smooth surfaces with relatively gentle grade and few major obstructions—in other words, on constructed highways. It works a lot less well where there are rocks, logs, ditches, bramble patches, trees, cliffs, etc. In such places strong, flexible limbs to climb over or around or push through are more effective.
If wheels ever did evolve here, they may simply have been out-competed before they could get very far. Still, you may be able to imagine circumstances in which wheels could evolve and compete successfully, as in Piers Anthony's Cluster or Keith Laumer's Retief's War. Even on Earth there are places where artificial wheels do pretty well without roads. Four-wheel drive vehicles travel freely over the deserts of the southwestern U.S. and the Serengeti Plain (although one I was riding in Tanzania got itself quite firmly, if temporarily, immobilized by an aardvark hole). In her story “Microbe,” Joan Slonczewski imagined a world on which a whole ecosystem co-evolved with wheels basic to everything and plants grew in such a way as to provide “pavement” for wheel-like animals.
We've already talked about several versions of swimming that might be adapted to any liquid medium. To these we might add jet or rocket propulsion such as that used by octopi and squids to make a quick getaway. However, in those animals it's only practical for occasional short bursts, and it's a little hard to see how it could be adapted to routine, continuous, long-term transportation.
On and in land there are several possibilities, each of which comes in several variants. “Crawling” can mean at least three distinct modes of getting around in animals as similar as different species of snakes. All of them seem rather cumbersome and limiting to be very likely in intelligent forms. Some animals tunnel underground, using digging tools such as spadelike snouts or paws. Some spend all their time underground, which may make for too little variety to be conducive to the development of intelligence—though some species might develop a long way toward intelligence and then, for some reason, adopt subterranean ways. Many Earthly creatures burrow only to construct nests (which may be quite complex), while venturing out onto the surface to get food and water by such means as walking and running.
Walking and running are variants of the same basic idea, using limbs to throw the body off-balance and fall in a controlled way, landing in a new place. The principle has the advantage of great adaptability. A foot, unlike a wheel, can simply be lifted over an obstacle. The shape of a foot may be adapted to suit specific needs: The sprawling hind paw of a snowshoe hare helps it stay on top of soft snow, while the cloven and padded hooves of a mountain goat give it sure traction on steep rock.
How many walking limbs might a creature have? On Earth, the number varies widely, from two on folks like us and ostriches, to dozens on millipedes. However, all the largest forms use a basic four-limb design, with limbs coming in pairs, some of which may be modified for special purposes. Evolution tends to select the simplest design that works. Not only do you need to tie up less of your nervous system to supervise two or four limbs than twenty or forty, but a small number of long ones work better than a whole slew of short ones. So we can probably expect, on Earthlike worlds, that the larger animals will tend to have small numbers of limbs, like four or perhaps six. On less Earthlike worlds, something else may work better. I've already mentioned the centipede-like Mesklinites, designed to survive and prosper under very high gravity. I can also imagine cases in which factors like strong gravity or chronically heavy weather would favor a more stable design but not require anything quite that drastic. Such situations might favor tripod-like stability, obtained either by two walking legs and a sturdy tail (as in the Merseians in Poul Anderson's Ensign Flandry) or more complete trilateral symmetry and three legs (as in the Tripeds in Damon Knight's “Rule Golden”).
Modification of basic limb design can greatly extend the possibilities. If one or more pairs of feet are modified into hands, climbing and brachiation (swinging by the arms from one handhold to another, like a gibbon) become possible.
Some creatures may go a step further and take up gliding. Flying squirrels have wide, extensible flaps of skin connecting their front and rear limbs, acting enough like wings to let them leap from one tree to another.
A step beyond gliding is flying: actively powered flight managed by flapping limbs modified into functional wings. Our most familiar examples are insects, birds and bats; in earlier ages we also had pterosaurs. On this planet, at this time, the biggest flyers run about twenty pounds for reasons again related to the square-cube law. With the biological materials used here, it becomes impractical to make a bigger creature that can have enough wing area and supply enough energy to its wings to keep itself aloft. Since that size is likely too small to support humanlike intelligence, Earthlike worlds seem unlikely to produce intelligence on wings.
However, a world with weaker gravity, denser atmosphere or both, might be able to do it. I've already mentioned that Earth seems to have had a denser atmosphere and much larger flying animals at times in the past. I've also mentioned the Overlords in Arthur C. Clarke's Childhood's End, who hail from a world of low gravity and thick atmosphere; they are a flying intelligence, and it shows in every aspect of the design of their cities. Could an intelligent flyer evolve on a more Earthlike world? Poul Anderson, in his 1963 book Is There Life on Other Worlds?, doubted it; but a few years later he took it as a challenge and came up with an admirable solution via improved biological engineering. The Ythrians, in his 1972 “Wings of Victory” and 1973 The People of the Wind, have a “supercharger,” a mechanism for increasing their air intake and thus their efficiency.
Shape
Body shapes don't happen arbitrarily; evolution selects those that are well suited to the way an organism lives. Thus, as we have already seen, successful swimmers tend to have streamlined bodies. Plants tend to maximize surface area, by growing leaves, to photosynthesize efficiently—though in some cases they must make compromises to meet other needs at the same time, such as the various mechanisms desert plants use to conserve water.
We've already seen that the square-cube law limits how big or small you can make an organism of any particular design and materials in any particular environment. The flip side of that is that size and environment impose constraints on shape. You could not, for example, remake an elephant in the form of a gazelle. A gazelle makes good use of its slender legs to move its smallish body around quickly; an elephant needs thick, strong legs just to support all that weight. However, if you could otherwise adapt an animal of elephantine mass to live in Martian gravity, it could be considerably more slender.
A few other features seem likely to be shared by most active creatures. A head seems likely to be of such value as to evolve almost anywhere—i.e., a package located high and/or far forward on the body, containing major sense organs and probably the most important nerve center (brain). Having sense organs concentrated high enables the owner to notice potential food or danger as far away as possible. Having them forward makes sense because, as Poul Anderson so deftly put it, “Even when fleeing, an animal has more need to know where it is bound than where it has been.” Having the sense organs close to the brain enables data to be processed and acted upon as quickly as possible, since nerve impulses travel considerably slower than light or sound.
Of course, some sense organs can't be located near the brain because their purpose is to detect things happening to other parts of the body. On the other hand, you can imagine multiple “brains” distributed through the body. This would have the advantages of allowing faster action on certain kinds of signals and making the overall nervous system less vulnerable to any local injury. However, it would have the disadvantage of making much nervous communication slow and unwieldy. I suspect that the disadvantages would usually outweigh the advantages, so most intellectual activity would be concentrated in a single heavily armored brain. On the other hand, there may be cases where more than one would have enough advantage to evolve, and this would certainly create interesting fictional possibilities.
A fascinating fictional variant on this theme is the Puppeteers in Larry Niven's “Neutron Star” and Ringworld. A Puppeteer has only one brain, but two heads housing sensory clusters and mouths. The brain, located in a bony hump between the two necks, enables the two mouths to carry on simultaneous, independent conversations. (This is not, by the way, as far-fetched as it may sound. The human brain has two “hemispheres” which in many respects function independently. Normally they communicate through a structure called the corpus callosum, but experiments on patients in whom that link has been destroyed show some fascinating results, which surely suggest possibilities for fictional aliens. [See the Gaz-zaniga and Holmes articles.])
The Puppeteers' mouths also function as manipulators, a class of devices often considered prerequisite for the building of any kind of civilization. In recent years this assumption has been called into question, in the light of research suggesting that at least some cetaceans (whales and dolphins) have complex social structures and perhaps highly developed languages. (“If they're so smart,” someone once asked me, “why haven't they done anything?” To which I replied, “How do you know they haven't? Do everybody's accomplishments have to look like our accomplishments?”) However, that possible exception aside, it does seem likely that in at least many environments, those beings that can develop their lives farthest beyond what nature has given them will be those with some means for manipulating their environment—reshaping it to their own needs and making tools to make that process even easier. Imagining skyscrapers does not make them part of your culture unless you have ways to build them.
Manipulators are not limited to extremely “advanced” animals, of course. Lobsters and crabs have claws shaped to serve particular manipulative ends. Cephalopods (octopi and squids) have prehensile tentacles equipped with suction cups. The elephant's nose is modified into a pretty good manipulator, though it's better suited to pulling than pushing.
Animals like raccoons have paws modified into handlike shapes that allow rather fine grasping and manipulation. Making one or more fingers opposable—a thumb—produces a quantum jump in the degree of manual control attainable. Next to the brain, the thumb is the most important single feature that has enabled humans to build what we call civilization. Something like it will very likely be found in many species with technological civilizations. At least three fingers (including thumb) seem necessary for a true hand (i.e., one significantly more capable than a lobster's claw). More than six or seven seem unlikely to give enough advantage to warrant the extra neural circuitry needed to operate them.
Other species in other environments may find different ways of achieving similar effects. G. David Nordley's huge Do'utians, in his “Trimus” stories, have repeatedly branched tongues that function as manipulators at levels ranging from coarse to fine. Why not modified feet? Because, being so massive, they need all their limbs simply to stand and walk.
Different numbers of limbs also lead to different possibilities. A centaur-like being, walking on four legs with two arms free for manipulation, could not come out of the same Earthly evolution that produced us. By the time reptiles and birds and mammals branched off, we were all down to four limbs maximum. There are straightforward evolutionary ways to modify or lose a pair of those, but not to add a new one. But on a world where the analogs of those classes had six limbs, one pair might well develop hands while the other four kept feet. Or one pair might become hands and another wings, leading to flyers both intelligent and dexterous. You might think Anderson's Ythrians would have to be such; Anderson himself did when he wrote Is There Life on Other Worlds? But by the time he wrote the story, he'd figured out a way to evolve them from four-limbed ancestors (their “feet” are actually their hands, while their wings double as feet when they must walk). It's a good example of how unobvious possibilities may become a lot more likely when you take a close enough look at a problem!
Structural Support
We've already looked at some of the design features needed for an animal of given size to exist in a given gravitational field. An important part of the problem is providing enough stiffness for the critter to keep its shape, move around and exert forces on other objects. For buoyant beings in liquid (or dense gaseous) surroundings, this isn't much of a problem; but for land animals, it's crucial. An octopus at home does just fine with a boneless body and tentacles, but a land crab or a lumberjack needs stiffening.
Most Earthly animals use either the land crab's solution (an exoskeleton) or the lumberjack's (an endoskeleton). At least one other approach is possible, but has found only limited application in our biology. An intrinsically soft (hollow or porous) body or body part can be stiffened by filling it with a gas or liquid under pressure. This is convenient for something that only needs stiffening occasionally, like a copulatory organ or the inflatable sac that a blowfish uses to make itself big and hard to swallow. It is not so good for something that must always be stiff—a leak could be lethal. For permanent support, some form of skeleton is preferable. The material isn't particularly important; a serviceable skeleton need only be made of suitably strong and hard stuff, and several different materials are used by different kinds of creatures on Earth.
The more important question is: Should the skeleton be internal or external? Almost all of the most advanced animals on Earth carry their bones inside, probably for reasons related to the need for …
Growth
Every creature I know of starts out as a smaller structure produced in the body of one or more adults of its kind. To become an adult itself, it must grow. An endoskeleton seems to provide the easiest way to do this, so it has become the usual approach in things that grow very large. Skeletons generally get their strength from hard substances that are produced by, but not part of, living cells. If your bones are inside, the softer tissues on the outside can grow continuously. The bones must do some growing, too, of course, but this is relatively easy to arrange since they are surrounded by blood vessels to keep their growth cells supplied with what they need.
An exoskeleton is less convenient. The ones on Earthly animals do not allow continuous growth; the shell itself, once made, stays the same size and so forces its contents to do likewise. Different groups of arthropods use two solutions to this problem:
1. Crustaceans, like crabs and lobsters, periodically shed their shells. The shell splits open and the animal, now without its usual armor, crawls out. For a brief period, while “soft-shelled,” it can grow. Then a new, slightly larger shell forms and hardens and growth stops until next time. The main drawback is that an animal in its soft-shelled phase must hole up and hide till its defenses are back in place.
This seems awkward for a creature that aspires to intelligence and civilization, and will probably be out-competed if endoskeletal beings like us chordates have already become established in the same neighborhood. On the other hand, there may be places where that doesn't happen, and civilization may in fact evolve from something like lobsters. Defenseless periods are inconvenient, of course, but the long childhood of primates like ourselves is such a period, too. Not only do we survive it, but it's essential to our being what we are. When most of your behavior is learned rather than instinctive, you need time to learn and protection to survive while doing so.
2. Many kinds of insects use complete metamorphosis. A larval form (e.g., grub or caterpillar) hatches from an egg, spends its part of the life cycle eating, then sequesters itself in an immobile case (pupa, with or without cocoon). There it rearranges its entire body to emerge some time later as an adult (e.g., butterfly) that mates and produces eggs to repeat the cycle.
This type of arrangement would not seem to lend itself well to an intelligent species, if only because the radical reconstruction of the body between larva and adult would seem to preclude time-binding. The adult seems unlikely to retain memories from its larval phase, so larvae can't be educated for adulthood—unless a line of evolution has developed something like the chemical learning I mentioned at the end of the section on intelligence. This is the case in the fictional example I mentioned before, Marc Stiegler's “Petals of Rose,” which postulates some of the most intriguing aliens ever imagined. Their adult lives are astonishingly brief periods of frenzied activity, completely dependent on the transmission of ancestral memories in the larval “bloodfeast [the last act of metamorphosis], in which the larva consumes the bulk of the brainblood of its bloodparents.”
An utterly different example of aliens with a complete metamorphosis can be found in Susan Shwartz's Heritage of Flight. Here is the caterpillar-butterfly dichotomy writ very large; the “eater” larvae are objects of terror even to their own parents—and the source of an exceedingly painful dilemma for humans who must try to live among them.
A sidelight I must mention in connection with metamorphoses is the old science-fictional standby of the shape-changer, found in memorable stories at least as far back as John W. Campbell's “Who Goes There?” and A.E. van Vogt's “Vault of the Beast.” The alien capable of assuming any shape at will is certainly a powerful image that lends itself to strong stories, but it's not an easy thing to make scientifically believable. Not that it's impossible—caterpillars turning into butterflies are living proof that shape-changers exist. But the shape-changers we know about must follow one preset plan, take a long time, and use nearly all of the organism's stored energy resources. Changing quickly would require lots of energy and generate lots of waste heat; being able to change into many different designs would require far greater flexibility of programming. The time may be ripe for a new shape-changer story that hits today's readers as hard as those two hit their first readers, yet makes itself fully believable in terms of today's science. A hint if you'd like to try: Learn all you can about nanotechnology!
While reading my descriptions of solutions to the growth problem used by Earthly arthropods, you may have wondered about a third possibility. Bones grow; why not simply build enough growth cells into an exoskeleton to let that grow, too? The problem there is that the growth cells would have to be supplied with blood, which requires a network of blood vessels both inside and outside the shell. That in turn implies a structure to carry the blood vessels on the outside—something like the velvet on a deer's antlers. It might happen somewhere; but the endoskeleton seems to get the same advantages so much more simply that if you do choose to use the velvety-exoskeleton model, you should be prepared to explain why that won the evolutionary race.
Reproduction
The problems of growth are closely tied to those of reproduction. For reasons discussed in chapter four, we can generally expect asexual reproduction in some primitive organisms, but some form of sex in more advanced ones. Two sexes are enough to confer large evolutionary advantages, but some evolutionary lines may have more (like the three in Isaac Asimov's The Gods Themselves). On the other hand, some Earthly animals evolved from sexual ancestors have found ways to reproduce parthenogenetically—there are entire species of lizards whose members are all identical females. (See, for example, O. Cuellar's article.)
The specific manner of delivering young into the world can vary greatly and have large effects on lifestyle. Many animals lay eggs that, when fertilized, contain genetic instruction packages (DNA) and raw materials (food) to build a new organism capable of existing outside, with or without help. Eggs can be produced in numbers from one to millions, fertilized internally or externally, and cared for diligently or left to chance. In some fish, a female discharges vast numbers of eggs into the water, a male ejects a cloud of sperm into the same general vicinity, and they go their separate ways; many eggs are eaten by predators, many hatchlings from the surviving eggs go the same way, and only a tiny percentage survive to adulthood. Birds fertilize internally, lay small numbers of eggs, guard them diligently until they hatch into young who can't yet care for themselves, and feed and teach them until they can. Some snakes are “ovoviviparous,” growing young in eggs but hatching them internally.
A couple of species of mammals lay eggs, but the vast majority use one of two methods of producing and caring for live young. In both cases a fetus is connected to the mother's bloodstream, with provision for supplying nutrients and oxygen and removing wastes. In marsupials this system is relatively inefficient, and the young must be born quite early. Tiny and undeveloped, they spend the first portion of their “outside” lives in a pouch outside the mother's body, leaving it more and more frequently as they become more able to fend for themselves. Placental mammals have an improved system for feeding fetuses and removing their wastes, and use it until a more advanced state of development. After birth, both kinds of mammals live on milk secreted by their mothers for the first part of their lives.
Science fiction writers have often dabbled in inventing new kinds of reproductive cycles, particularly ones whose workings are not obvious to their first human observers. In Susan Shwartz's Heritage of Flight, the adult flyers and larval eaters are initially thought to be two different species, one very attractive and the other utterly repulsive to humans.
Warm-Blooded or Cold-Blooded?
The animals we know are often loosely categorized as “warmblooded,” meaning they have an internal mechanism for keeping their body temperature within a narrow range despite environmental fluctuations; and “cold-blooded,” meaning they don't, and therefore become warmer (and more active) or colder (and less active) whenever their surroundings do. “Cold-blooded” is, in at least some cases, an unflattering oversimplification. Many reptiles control their body temperatures quite closely (within a degree or so) as long as they have the opportunity to move back and forth between warmer and cooler places. However, they're very dependent on having that choice, and in practice tend to spend much of their time simply lying in places where the temperature feels right. A warmblooded animal, with a built-in means of optimizing its temperature, can remain active under a much wider range of conditions. The disadvantage is that it must be active more of the time, and eat much more, than its cold-blooded counterparts. Intelligence probably has more chance to evolve in warm-blooded creatures—and a strong incentive to do so since they can't go as long without food.
Warm-blooded animals, in many climates, also need a body covering to help them retain body heat. (How badly they need it depends on size—in general, large animals need it less, since their low surface-to-volume ratios help them conserve heat.) Body insulation can be hair or feathers, or it could be something like foam insulation. In humans, and perhaps in other intelligent species, the insulator is not built in, but added voluntarily in the form of clothing. In the climates where the first humans evolved, there was not much need for body insulation, which may explain why they lost most of it. Later, when they expanded into other climes, the ability to make artificial insulation greatly increased their adaptability.
Body coverings are not just for insulation, of course. They also provide protection and may have to serve other purposes as well, which is likely to influence their exact nature. Feathers lend themselves especially well to flight, and so have become standard equipment for birds; bats, however, prove that they're not necessary for flight. Marc Stiegler's Rosans, who must generate lots of waste heat during their frenetic adulthoods, are covered with “hundreds of delicate cooling fins, the Rosan equivalent of scales or feathers,” but looking to humans much like flower petals.
Senses
Equipment for deciding on a course of action in response to what's happening around you is useless unless you have ways to know what's happening around you. Thus any successful organism needs senses for getting information about its environment. Even a plant needs to “know” where the sun is and which way is up.
In places where light is readily available and travels freely, sight is probably the most useful of senses. It can carry a great deal of information, carries it faster than any other medium, and carries it with very high precision. For example, you can look at a distant football field in the midst of a play and tell exactly where every player is. Doing so, of course, requires highly developed eyes. Eyes probably originated as simple photosensitive spots that did little more than tell the owner where there was more or less light. The compound eyes of insects are little more than clusters of such spots, allowing crude recognition of shape and motion, but little detail—so they're not very likely in highly intelligent animals. The most intelligent animals on Earth, on a couple of major evolutionary routes (chordates and mollusks), have independently evolved the “lens-camera” type of eye, in which a lens forms a detailed image of an object and projects it onto a retina, where densely packed photoreceptors can send the brain signals constituting an accurate map of the object.
Two eyes have a large advantage over one: They enable depth perception and help judge distances. (However, that's not the only way they can be used. African chameleons use their two eyes to scan, more or less independently, two separate fields of view.) The advantage of more eyes than two is less obvious or general, though you can certainly imagine specific cases in which they would have one. An eye or two in the back of the head could be useful if you were frequently pursued by more than one attacker (or teaching fourth grade). In 'Tinker's Spectacles,” Gregory Bennett has imagined a situation in which an extra eye (and a different kind of neural wiring) might provide an extra kind of vision useful under special circumstances. The Pled life cycle depends on their fighting fast-moving predators called gyrbirds. To do that they've evolved a set of three eyes, two of which provide range information but can't adjust very fast, while the third eye acts with them to judge how fast range is changing.
It's relatively easy to imagine modifications that might fit eyes for special jobs. A telescopic eye, or a “zoom” eye, could be concocted, though it's not clear under what conditions it would be really necessary. Earthly birds of prey achieve astounding acuity with more “conventional” eyes optimized for high resolution at long distances. “Four-eyed fish” found in the tropics really have two eyes, but each has two irises and two retinas, one for vision above the water and the other for underwater. Nocturnal animals often have a reflective layer behind the retina to give them a second chance to use light that would be wasted by a diurnal animal's eye. In my story “… And Comfort to the Enemy,” I took this a step further: The tsapeli, one of the few nocturnal civilizations I can recall, have “searchlights” built into their eyes. Some animals do generate light; the tsapeli must do that at unusually high power levels and focus the light into a beam where it's needed.
How about eyes using other parts of the electromagnetic spectrum? What we call visible light is likely to prove, at least approximately, the most useful on other planets as well, since it's a part of the spectrum in which atmospheres tend to be relatively transparent. However, there's no need to assume that other beings will see exactly the part of the spectrum that we do. They might tend to favor the colors produced in greatest abundance by their own star (and transmitted best by their own atmosphere). They might see an even narrower part of the spectrum than we do, or a somewhat wider one—extending into the ultraviolet and/or infrared. (Some animals on Earth already do such things; some insects see ultraviolet but not red, and the snakes called pit vipers have organs for detecting infrared from warm-blooded prey.)
They are not likely to use wavelengths very much shorter or longer than “visible light.” X-rays and gamma rays are not abundant enough in most environments to provide a reliable source of illumination—which is fortunate since they tend to be destructive to living cells. Radio waves share the availability problem, and also would require a relatively enormous eye to form an image of useful resolution.
In some environments, sight is not particularly useful because it is in short supply and or doesn't travel reliably. Under many such conditions, hearing is better—and since even beings who rely primarily on sight sometimes have to deal with such conditions, they tend to have pretty good hearing, too. In a jungle, lines of sight tend to be so short that any enemy you can see, you see too late. Sound, however, has much longer waves than light and travels around obstacles, so you may be able to hear something long before you can see it. If you add refinements such as paired ears and external ear funnels of complicated shapes (like ours), you can even get a pretty fair idea of where the sound source is. On nocturnal animals like certain desert foxes, the external ears may be very large for the same reason astronomical telescopes are very large: to gather as much energy as possible and enable the owner to hear very faint sounds.
Land animals generally use a relatively limited range of sound frequencies, though the exact range chosen varies. For healthy humans it's about twency to twenty thousand hertz; or, since going up an octave means doubling the frequency, about ten octaves. That's still a lot more than our visual range, which is slightly less than one octave. By being able to perceive and distinguish such a wide range of frequencies, we make up to some extent for our inability to hear the kinds of detail—i.e., images—that we see with light. We've also learned to distinguish a lot of auxiliary properties of sound, such as the shape of the wave (which we hear as “tone quality”) and variations in pitch and amplitude. This has made it an excellent way to transmit information, so many animals have also developed sound-producing organs for signalling to each other—and in some cases, those signals develop into language.
In animals for whom vision is of little use, sound senses may be even more developed, sometimes in ways resembling the ways we use light. Dolphins can hear and produce sounds over a much wider frequency range than we can—up to perhaps two hundred kilo-hertz. In addition to using sound for communication, in ways whose sophistication we are just beginning to grasp, they use it as “sonar” for navigation and food location. A dolphin can send out a burst of high-frequency sound and, by analyzing the echos, learn not only where objects are, but quite a bit about what kinds of objects they are and what they're doing. Visibility in water is often quite limited, so sound is the best available way to form “pictures.” Sound waves are all longer than light and therefore can't form images of such high resolution; but high-frequency sound can do a pretty good job. In an environment where light can't do the job at all, high-frequency sound is a winner.
Chemical senses such as smell and taste also have their uses. For us, the latter is of value mainly for confirming that the food we already have in our mouths is in fact what we think it is. It also encourages eating by providing positive reinforcement in the form of pleasure. For some other animals, it does considerably more than that. Dolphins seem to use a sense perhaps best-called taste for learning a great deal about the water in which they swim. Salmon use it to find their way back to where they were hatched to lay their own eggs.
Smell provides a way of detecting a variety of things, from food to predators, that are wo/yet in hand or mouth, but are close enough to warrant serious consideration. It's particularly useful in places like the aforementioned jungle. Some predators, such as dogs and cats, have developed it to something far more sensitive and refined than our relatively crude version. However, it seems unlikely to serve well as a principal long-range sense, carrying highly detailed information with the precision of sight or sound. Scent works by detecting and identifying trace molecules that have travelled through atmosphere or liquid medium from the smellee to the smeller's nose (or whatever passes for one). The problem with that is twofold: Such molecules travel much slower than light or sound waves, and they are likely to be deflected by collisions with other molecules en route. Thus they can't provide reliable information on fast-changing conditions, and they don't give a very precise idea of where they originated. (Except, of course, under highly specialized conditions, such as those in Hal Clement's “Uncommon Sense,” where an airless environment allowed molecules to travel [usually] in nearly straight lines. Thus his aliens could use organs resembling pinhole cameras to “image” food or prey, using molecules instead of light or sound.)
Most organisms will also need some short-range senses to keep them informed of conditions in and very near their own bodies, such as a sharp object, a hot iron or an ice cube pressing against their skin. The semicircular canals in our ears provide a balance sense that enables us to maintain the improbable upright posture that most of us take for granted. The lateral lines of fish keep them up to date on fine variations of water pressure and currents. Some fish can detect (and produce) electrical fields. There is some evidence that birds monitor the Earth's magnetic field as an aid to their long-distance migrations (which may get them in trouble the next time that field reverses, as it does periodically). In inventing aliens for new environments, you may find that still other specialized senses are both desirable and plausible.
Frills
We've now surveyed many of the basic characteristics you'll want to consider in concocting your aliens, but you'll still have room to play with many less basic ones. Remember that evolution does not always come up with the very best possible solution to a problem, and that the correlation between genes and traits is not one-to-one. If evolution selects for one trait, such as a long neck, it may happen that the same set of genes incidentally produces another trait, such as green eyelids. As long as the “by-product” trait doesn't carry enough evolutionary disadvantage to cancel out the advantage of the “principal” trait, it may spread freely through a population. Some traits are “evolutionarily indifferent"; in humans, for example, whether you have brown or blue eyes is seldom a life-or-death matter. Others may be slightly detrimental, but not enough to have any significant evolutionary effect. Our wisdom teeth (apparently left over from a time when our ancestors had longer jaws) now cause many of us pain and bills and bring few of us any conspicuous benefit; but neither do they often kill us or keep us from reproducing.
Such traits I lump here as “frills”—“extras” that an organism can have but doesn't have to. They can be literal frills, in the form of “decorative” bits of skin or hair, or things like color patterns, the precise number of toes or an ability to change color. Such options can provide you as a writer with some of your best opportunities to have fun with your aliens, giving them character and individuality. And in some cases they may take on more significance than they originally had. Color changes, for example, may be inconsequential under some conditions, but under others prove quite useful for camouflage or communication.
Self-Modification
Finally, we must note that once a species gains the ability to reengineer its own genetics, all these constraints about natural evolution get seriously weakened. Humans, as we now are, are quite incapable of living continuously underwater without technological help. But we can imagine creating genetically modified humans with gills instead of lungs, who could live only underwater. Similarly, we may meet, either here or on their own turf, aliens who have reshaped themselves into forms quite unlike the ones their “natural” ancestors inherited. This could lead to interesting misunderstandings, say, if a human party is trying to guess where a party of aliens came from by analyzing their appearance and lifestyle.
SOME CLOSING TIPS
If we limit ourselves to naturally evolved forms, though, the gist of the preceding arguments does tend to agree with de Camp that a more or less humanoid shape—at least as human as a monkey, a Deinonychus (a type of small dinosaur), or a kangaroo—is favored under Earthlike conditions. But note also that even for those, appreciable differences will usually occur, and one shouldn't make a habit of writing about aliens that are just like people. Those would require conditions just like Earth, and considering the range of possibilities, those will be very rare indeed.
And never forget that the range is considerably broader than “Earthlike conditions.” Even planets that are fairly similar to Earth will usually be somewhat different, and some planets will be a lot different. For those, life may be wildly different from what we're used to, and you must design it to fit its environment.
The overriding principle, regardless of how like or unlike Earth your planet is, is this: If you want to create believable, interesting aliens, you cannot simply scale some Earthly creature up or down, or cobble together features from two or more (such as putting an elk's head on a grizzly bear's body). Every being must fit the environment that produced it. And form and environment together will shape its way of life and the kind of culture (if any) that it builds.
