---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0012.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["language", "word", "one", "english", "human", "use", "sound", "form", "alien", "different", "like", "used", "vowel", "verb", "example", "may", "least", "story", "even", "thing", "tense", "noun", "know", "way", "many"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0012html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 7
Alien Language
That's as close as I could come, in symbols widely understood on Earth, to transcribing a key sentence from my first story that ever attracted any serious interest from an editor. The story (“A Devil and a Deep Blue Sea”) had other problems and never sold, but it did draw a genuine letter of encouragement from an editor who had previously sent me only printed rejection slips. Not too long after that he bought my first story, and was soon buying them regularly.
What did this story have that its predecessors didn't? The most important element to catch the editor's eye, I think, was the careful attention it paid to the role of language in contact between two alien species. I wrote it in part because I couldn't remember ever reading another story that showed the actual process of a human learning an alien language. I consciously set out to do so—though of course the main thrust of the story revolved around what the aliens said once communication was established.
To show the process of learning the language, I had to know quite a bit about the language—in other words, I had to invent it in considerable detail. This isn't always necessary, of course. You may never need to show an alien language in that much detail. But you will almost certainly include at least a few words—names, if nothing else—and likely some general description of what the language sounds or looks like. As with any other aspect of writing, the more you know about your background, the more convincing the part you tell will be—because the reader will sense that what's on the page is part of a larger and self-consistent whole. One of my most satisfying moments as a writer was the time a copyeditor caught a grammatical mistake in an alien language for which I had not spelled out any rules.
As with organisms and cultures, the range of shapes languages can take is wider than you may suspect, even on Earth. So let's start this discussion of how aliens might communicate by surveying some of the ways humans communicate, starting with the most familiar and then going farther afield. What I'm about to do is not intended as a comprehensive and orderly introduction to linguistics, but rather a quick tour of some of the tricks human languages have come up with, to give you a feel for just how much variety is possible. For a more detailed and methodical study, you might start with something like Victoria Fromkin and Robert Rodman's An Introduction to Language, which will in turn refer you to many other sources. Also, I've found it both instructive and entertaining to browse in the articles on languages and linguistics in the Encyclopedia Britannica.
TOOLS OF THE TRADE:A MINI-MUSEUM OF LINGUISTIC CURIOS
If English is the only language you've used or studied, you've encountered some grammatical terms and concepts, but not others. Languages differ enough that you need different vocabularies to describe their features. Swahili, for example, does not have participles, while English does not have simultaneous and consecutive tenses. There's some overlap in what those things do, but a lot of difference in how they do it—and even their functions are by no means equivalent.
I will assume here that you have at least a passing familiarity with such basic features of English as consonants and vowels, nouns and verbs, adjectives and adverbs, pronouns and prepositions, and past and present tenses. Starting from there, I'll remind you of some features you might have encountered in other languages commonly taught in American schools, and then move on to still others found only in languages you're less likely to have encountered.
If you've studied French or Spanish, for example, you've met verb conjugations. A conjugation is a pattern for changing the form of a verb to express person, number and tense. In English this is so simple you were hardly even aware of it. The simple present tense has two forms (go and goes) and the past only one (went); the future is formed by placing an auxiliary verb in front of the basic form (will go). In French or Spanish things are immediately more complicated because for each tense you need to learn (approximately) six forms: one each for I; you (singular/familiar); he, she or it; we; you (plural/polite); and they.
Moreover, there is not a single pattern that always works. Spanish verbs are classifiable into three different conjugations, and French four. If that's not enough, both languages contain lots of verbs that are “irregular”—that deviate in small or great ways from any of the standard conjugations, and so must be memorized. Since that's true to an appreciable extent in all the languages commonly taught in North American schools, you may assume that languages have to be full of irregular verbs. (They don't; more on that later.) On the bright side, while such languages require you to learn more forms, they also give you some extra flexibility. When the person and tense are implicit in the verb form itself, you don't always have to explicitly identify the subject. Spanish usually skips the subject pronoun unless it's needed for clarity or emphasis (e.g., hablo instead of yo hablo for I speak).
In learning French or Spanish conjugations, you also discovered that tenses aren't necessarily defined the same way in different languages. Where English has one simple past tense, Spanish has two. The preterite (corresponding roughly but not exactly to what French teachers often call “past historic”) refers to an action that took place once at a definite time (”Iread the book yesterday”) and the imperfect to an action that took place repeatedly or continuously over a period (“I often read a book when I got home from work in those days”).
In French or Spanish or German, you also have to distinguish levels of address. In speaking to any individual, you must decide whether to address him or her familiarly, as tu or tú or du, or formally (politely), as vous, Usted or Sie. The familiar forms are used in addressing animals, children and people younger or of lower status than yourself; the polite forms in addressing those older or of higher status. The difficulty (and pitfall) lies in the need to make a decision about which class is appropriate for anyone you're addressing. It can get tricky, and guessing wrong can get you into trouble. Contemporary English (now that thou has fallen from popularity) spares you that decision. The closest English now comes is the choice of first name or title plus last (“John” or “Mr. Smith”).
Treacherous as the distinction between polite and familiar address may seem to someone encountering French or German for the first time, it can be and sometimes is worse. Polish has 45 versions of “you” (not 45 separate forms, admittedly, but 45 separate situations [combinations of number, level, gender, case, etc.] that must be distinguished to know which form to use). Japanese has an elaborate system of honorifics and degrees of floweriness that must be carefully chosen according to the relative status of speaker and person addressed.
One thing you were probably pleased to discover in Spanish or German is that spelling and pronunciation can be more straightforward and logical than they are in English. On the other hand, you may have been dismayed to find that you had to learn to make new, unfamiliar and perhaps “difficult” sounds such as the rolled r and the German vowels ö and ü. (Would it make you feel better to know that English is just full of sounds, such as th and the continually changing vowel in the American word can't, which occur in few other languages and are strange and difficult for almost everybody else?)
If you studied German or Latin, you had to learn about cases and declensions. These are to nouns, adjectives, articles and pronouns what conjugations are to verbs. English contains vestigial traces of them, but only vestigial traces, in the different forms of pronouns used as subjects and objects (I and me, he and him, she and her). In German and Latin every noun, adjective, article (if any) or pronoun has to be put in the correct form (case) for its role in the sentence. German has not two, but four cases; Latin has seven. And, of course, each language has several patterns of declension, and a generous sprinkling of exceptions to the rules.
All my examples so far have been from languages commonly taught in our schools and more or less closely related to English. If we go a bit further afield, things become even more interesting. If we go a lot further afield, they get a lot more interesting.
All of the languages I've mentioned belong to a large family called Indo-European; English and German belong to the Germanic subfamily and Latin, French and Spanish to the Romance subfamily. Yet even within that group we found one language, Latin, that doesn't use articles—words (the, a, an) that we use constantly. Many languages get along quite comfortably without using them at all. Examples can be found both inside the Indo-European group (Slavic languages such as Russian and Polish) and outside (such as Chinese, Japanese and Swahili). Speakers of such languages, when learning English, may find it hard to see what purpose articles serve and to know when to put them in. Scandinavian languages do use them, but the definite article is a suffix added to the noun instead of a separate word in front of it (Swedish hus = house, huset = the house).
Slavic languages also include a verb classification called aspects. Remember the distinction between the preterite and imperfect tenses in Romance languages? Now imagine the same kinds of shades of meaning being divided in all tenses. Slavic languages have (at least) two separate, fully conjugated verbs to translate a single English verb. One, the perfective aspect, is used in situations with a feeling of definiteness or completeness, like the Romance preterite. The other, the imperfective aspect, is used for continuing or habitual actions, rather like the Romance imperfect.
Any language is a set of tools for expressing ideas. Just as one toolbox may contain a crescent wrench and another may not, some languages contain tools that others must make do without. One particularly useful tool that English lacks, but Slavic and Scandinavian languages have, is a full set of reflexive possessive adjectives and pronouns. In English, if “Joe told Henry he loved his wife,” Henry may be a bit edgy until he ascertains whether the wife in question is Joe's or Henry's. In Russian, there is no ambiguity. “His” is one word if it refers to Joe (the subject of the sentence) and a completely different one if it refers to someone else (such as Henry). (Of course, this isn't always an advantage: English jokes that depend on such ambiguity can't be translated into Russian!)
Another tool that English lacks is a third-person singular “gender-noncommittal” pronoun. In recent years, many people have been trying to get such a thing established (e.g. “s/he”), but it's hard to introduce language changes at such a fundamental level as pronouns and so far none has been universally accepted. “It” does not fill the bill. In English it implies a lack of sexuality, which most people find insulting when applied to themselves. What I'm talking about is a pronoun that implies that the person does have sexuality, but doesn't specify it. Many languages (e.g., Swahili, Japanese and Hungarian) have only that kind of pronoun, offering no easy way to specify “he” or “she.” (In practice, this doesn't seem to guarantee a sexism-free society.)
Gender, by the way, thoroughly pervades most Indo-European languages. English, again, has shed all but traces. In Spanish or French or German, everything has gender, which does not necessarily have anything to do with sex: A French table is “feminine,” a German maiden is “neuter.” Adjectives must agree in gender and number with the noun they modify, and in Polish and Russian even past tense verbs vary with the gender of the subject.
Outside the Indo-European group, the differences can be much larger and more fundamental than anything I've mentioned so far. Here's a sampling of things you might encounter:
Really Different Sounds
Semitic languages such as Hebrew and Arabic make extensive use of guttural sounds. “Guttural,” by the way, is probably the single word most misused by writers trying to describe alien languages; it refers quite specifically to sounds produced in the throat, such as the German or Scottish ch or the Arabic q. (Yes, I know it's sometimes loosely used to mean “strange, harsh or unpleasant,” but those are too vague, especially for science fiction. Science fiction readers will interpret “guttural” in its more precise sense, and be annoyed with you if you don't seem to be using it that way.)
Several southern African languages use “clicks” that are so different from any of our sounds that English speakers have trouble even hearing them as speech. You can hear samples in the movie The Gods Must Be Crazy. When you hear a Bushman speaking, it's likely to sound like someone speaking a “normal” clickless language, with an unidentified separate source making clicking noises in the background.
The set of sounds that human speech organs can make is considerably larger than the subset used by any language. Babies in all cultures try them all out in the early stages of learning to talk; their culture reinforces the ones they'll be expected to use, and they soon forget how to make the others.
Different Methods of Inflection
“Inflection,” in linguistics, means changing the form of a word to express shades of meaning or related meanings, such as leading, led and leader from lead. That example illustrates two methods used in Indo-European languages: changing an ending and changing an internal vowel. The latter method is relatively rare in Indo-European languages (in Germanic languages like English and German it occurs mainly in a few “strong verbs” such as sink, sank, sunk), but it's the central modus operandi in Semitic languages. There a basic word root consists of a group of consonants (commonly three), with related words derived by changing the vowels interspersed among them. If English worked like Arabic, postal, pastel, pistol and pustule would all look like forms of the same word, or at least very closely related; while kisses, kisser, kissed and kissing would look unrelated.
Tones
In many African and Oriental languages, the tone in which a word is pronounced is integral to its identity and drastically affects its meaning. English makes limited use of intonation to express things like attitude—e.g., the syllable “Oh” can be pronounced in different tonal patterns to express resignation, astonishment, delight or skepticism—but truly tonal languages like Chinese go much further. The same combination of vowels and consonants (say, “blurp”) pronounced in four tones—e.g., high level, low level, rising and falling—can make it four completely unrelated words, with meanings as different as spinach, carburetor, politician and entropy.
Completely Different Types of Grammars
Most Indo-European languages are predominantly inflectional, meaning they do most of their grammar by changing word forms. There are other ways to do it; most languages make some use of more than one method, but one predominates. English is an atypical Indo-European language in that it has lost most of its inflectional forms and become largely isolating. In an isolating language—Chinese is a good example—words don't change form, but derive much of their meaning from the order in which they're assembled. The same word can not only represent different tenses, numbers or cases, but different parts of speech, depending on where they occur in a sentence. Walk, for example, can be either a verb or a noun, and if it's a noun, it can be any case. Word order is much more critical in a highly isolating language than in a highly inflected one. In the English sentence “The dog bit the man,” you know who bit whom from which participant precedes and which follows the verb. If you change it to “The man bit the dog,” the meaning is reversed and newsworthy. In German or Russian, you can express either meaning with either word order, because “the man” and “the dog” will have different forms depending on whether they're subject or object.
A third major grammar type is agglutinative, in which the rules of grammar deal largely with how to build words by stringing together elements, each of which has a definite form and meaning. At first glance, these may look similar to Indo-European inflectional patterns, if the things added to a basic form are suffixes and there aren't too many of them. In Turkish, for example, ev is house, ler is a plural suffix, and evler is houses. But you can add multiple suffixes: den is an ablative case suffix, meaning from, so from the houses is ev + ler + den = evlerden.
The added elements don't have to be suffixes. In Swahili, most of the grammar is done with prefixes. The plural of kikombe is vikombe; the singular of watu is mtu. If you encountered the word kilichotutosha, what you would look up in the dictionary is tosha, meaning to be sufficient. To understand the whole word you would have to recognize four prefixes and know that when they occur in this order ki is a subject prefix for a particular class of nouns, li is a past tense prefix, cho is a relative pronoun for the same class of nouns as ki, and tu is a first person plural object pronoun. So kilichotutosha means (that) which was enough for us.
This may all sound rather formidable, but that's mainly because it's so different from what you're used to, not because it's intrinsically difficult. In fact, agglutination can make for a refreshingly logical and regular language. A beginning Swahili text can introduce three or four verb tenses in the first lesson and immediately expect you to be able to use them on any verb in the language, given its root. In marked contrast to French or Spanish, this is not only reasonable, but easy; learning three tenses just means learning three two-letter prefixes.
This doesn't mean that agglutinative languages are necessarily totally simple, regular or easy. Sometimes, for example, they use vowel harmony, in which the vowels in suffixes or prefixes (or infixes, inserted in the middle of a word!) must change to agree with those in the root word. In Turkish, vowels are divided into “front vowels” (including e and i) and “back vowels” (including a and o). In my example above, the plural and ablative suffixes were ler and den because ev contains a front vowel. If the root word contains back vowels, like oda (room), the suffixes must also contain a back vowel, so from the rooms becomes odalardan. I mentioned that the “pronoun prefixes” in my Swahili example were for a particular noun class; noun classes are roughly equivalent to grammatical gender, but there are eight of them. The plural of kitu is vitu, the plural of mtu is watu, and so on; and each class has its own set of “concords” (prefixes and other building blocks for various purposes) . Some languages such as Eskimo (sometimes called “poly-synthetic”) carry the agglutinative principle to dazzling heights where a long and complicated English sentence becomes a single word.
Different Writing Systems
Many languages are written in an alphabet, in which a few symbols are used to represent the basic sounds of a language and therefore can be used to write all of its words. How closely spelling corresponds to pronunciation varies widely. English has drawn words from many sources and its spellings and pronunciations have not evolved consistently or at the same rate. Thus there are many inconsistencies in English spelling and a good deal of memorization is required. Nevertheless, with enough practice you can usually make a pretty good guess at how to pronounce an unfamiliar word. In Swahili and Turkish, the match is so close that you can always pronounce a new word correctly on the first try, or spell one you hear for the first time.
Numerous alphabets are used, and other methods of writing are possible. Japanese and Cherokee use syllabaries, in which a symbol represents not a vowel or a consonant, but an entire syllable. The earliest writing was almost certainly pictograms—stylized pictures intended to represent literal objects such as a man, a woman or a tree. (These have been making a comeback lately in such areas as international traffic and “No Smoking” signs.) The use of pictograms gradually expanded to include representing ideas associated with an object (such as heat with the Sun) or the sound of the word representing the object (such as a pictogram for Sun used to represent the English word son). Alphabets are a late stage of the latter kind of evolution. A surviving example of the former is the set of several thousand ideographs or characters used to write Chinese. Each must be memorized, so they're far less convenient and conducive to widespread literacy (and typewriter or computer keyboards) than an alphabet. On the other hand, they have the virtue that they can be read by educated people from all parts of China, even though their spoken dialects are mutually unintelligible.
And So Forth
I could go on listing such things for a very long time, mentioning such things as inclusive and exclusive forms of we (depending on whether the person addressed is included or not), audible question marks, words that can mean either yes or no depending on how the question was worded, and the twenty-six moods of the verb in the Australian language Aranda. But space doesn't permit, and by now you have the idea. If you want your aliens' languages to be truly alien, learn as much as you can about human languages-both general principles and the particulars of a few sample languages. I strongly recommend studying at least one non-Indo-European language. But even that is not enough as a basis for inventing alien languages because, diverse as they are, all the languages I've mentioned have one very important thing in common, which will not be shared by your aliens.
BEYOND HUMAN
All my sample languages were, of necessity, human languages, evolved for use by human speech and sense organs and nervous systems. I've already mentioned that all human babies try out all such sounds and their cultures select a subset of those to use. Something similar seems to be true of grammar. The kinds of grammar humans use seem subject to certain broad limits imposed by the hard-wiring of their nervous systems. (See Bickerton's article on “Creole Languages.”)
Except under very special circumstances, your aliens will not be human. Neither their nervous systems nor their anatomical equipment for making and detecting sound are likely to be very similar to ours. They may not be able to produce our sounds—or we theirs. To get a better idea of what range of speech sounds might be used by intelligent beings elsewhere, you should listen not only to French and Arabic and Chinese, but to the whole range of sounds produced by all kinds of animals: the buzzing of bees, the long songs of whales, the eerie laughs and howls of loons and prairie chickens and oropendolas….
A typical field guide to birds will try to describe a bird call with some rather fanciful transcription like “Good Sam Peabody” or “Whee-wheeoo-titi-whee.” (I'm not making these up!) Such a transcription may be somewhat useful as a mnemonic to help you recognize the actual bird, by suggesting its general rhythm and intonation. But the vowels and consonants in the transcription aren't even vaguely approximated in the real thing.
The sounds birds and cetaceans make are simply too different from ours to be mutually pronounceable, or for theirs to be represented with any accuracy by our spelling systems. The situation with beings evolved independently on other worlds is more likely to be like that than like humans who simply grew up in different cultures.
The sentence with which I opened this chapter has to be written in musical notation because it's in a language in which absolute pitch and length of syllables are essential to meaning. Every syllable is one of seven vowels or semivowels (the speakers have froglike lips and flexible mouth walls, but no tongues), pronounced on one of thirteen pitches and with short, long or medium duration. Musical notation is the best way we have to write such things. They, of course, have their own—a syllabary in which each vowel or semivowel is represented by a basic geometric form (a vertical line, a horizontal line, a circle, etc.) with embellishments to indicate its pitch and accompanied by dots or dashes to indicate length. Their script is written in a counterclockwise spiral from page margin in toward the center, “framing” any accompanying matter such as illustrations. Few humans could speak this language. While most human languages make at least some use of relative pitch patterns, this one requires speaker and listener to have what musicians call “perfect pitch,” which few of us do.
The Kyyra language in my Lifeboat Earth series (the most detailed references are in The Sins of the Fathers) is somewhat similar in that it uses absolute pitch and length. It differs in that the Kyyra do have tongues, and rather agile ones, so they can and do use the whole human range of vowels and consonants, and then some. They can learn any human language more easily than any of us can learn theirs, simply because their built-in speech tools are more versatile than ours. They have at least one kind of inflection at their disposal that humans don't—they can conjugate verbs by transposing them. They can, at least in principle, convey more information faster, since they have more ways to vary each syllable they speak.
Of course, your aliens may not even use sound as their principal medium of information exchange. Other forms of communication are not only possible, but used right here on Earth. I've already mentioned that bees “dance” to direct their coworkers to food supplies. Many animals use chemicals called pheromones to convey such messages as, “I'm ready to mate.” Those messages are pretty simple, though, and the methods may be limited in applicability by the nature of the media. Smells, for example, tend to be too sloppy in both spatial and temporal resolution to lend themselves to holding esoteric discussions like this one. However, I've already mentioned one possible exception, in Hal Clement's story “Uncommon Sense.” For another fictional example of sophisticated chemical communication, see Joan Slonczewski's Still Forms on Foxfield.
In general, the likelihood of a particular medium developing as a major means of communication will depend on considerations already discussed in the section of chapter five on “Senses.” Some beings could use modulated light (octopi use complex changes in body coloration to express emotional state), but that has a line-of-sight limitation. Sound seems likely to be the best compromise for many environments, at least environments at all similar to those found on Earth, since it lends itself to a fair degree of precision and speed under a wide range of conditions. So I'd guess that many of the universe's beings do speak, in one way or another, with sound.
But not necessarily with words or sentences even as similar to ours as the ones I've already described. In earlier chapters I've mentioned an alien of at least moderate intelligence that lives in the oceans of Earth: dolphins. Living in a water world that is far more three-dimensional than ours, they use a much wider frequency range of sound than we do, both for communication and as sonar, for navigating and locating food. While researching my novelette “Pinocchio” (which also appears as the third section of Lifeboat Earth), my studies led me to suspect that, since their means of communication and perception were so closely linked, intelligent dolphins might find the human concept of “word” odd and difficult to grasp. “Our language,” Pinocchio explains to a human contact, “grew out of descriptions, and our descriptions are much more graphic than yours. You might say we talk in pictures…[For example] instead of saying 'A fish just swam by above and to my right,' I'd say 'I made such-and-such kind of feeling noises, and this is what I heard.' Another dolphin, when I repeated my echoes, would literally see that fish—what kind it was, how big it was, where it was, how fast it was going, and what was around it.”
We still don't know whether Earth's dolphins actually have such linguistic or cultural sophistication, but even if they don't, dolphin-analogs elsewhere could (an interesting variant can be found in G. David Nordley's “Final Review”). The point is that when you invent aliens, you should, insofar as possible and to the extent that you're interested, let their languages be a logical outgrowth of the rest of their natures.
PRACTICAL TIPS
When preparing to write about aliens, ask yourself how much you need to know about their language, and then how much you'd like to know. Some stories require very little; others demand a lot. In Tweedlioop, I knew little about the aliens' language except that it included a lot of birdlike whistles and a sound system so different from ours that they couldn't even begin to speak human languages, or vice versa. In “A Devil and a Deep Blue Sea,” the detailed structure of the language was so integral to the story that I had to invent it in considerable detail. In The Sins of the Fathers I didn't have to, but I chose to, as part of the process of “bringing the Kyyra to life” for myself and the reader. In Newton and the Quasi-Apple, I didn't actually include much of the language in the story, but I figured out the basics anyway, to ensure that what I did include was consistent with a larger context. In this case it was fairly easy—the story had to be about a very humanoid species on a very Earthlike planet, so the languages were mutually speakable.
By personal preference, I usually work out at least the basic structure of an alien language, and encourage others to do so, too. But that doesn't mean you have to write a complete, detailed grammar, much less an unabridged dictionary. If the language is so different from human ones as to be mutually unpronounceable, and its structure doesn't play a key role in your story, you may need no more than a general description of how it sounds to humans and how the two species manage to communicate. If it lends itself to at least approximate transcription into our alphabet, though, you'll probably want to know at least a few ground rules.
In my experience, the minimum needed to include a modest number of words in the story is a list of what letters are used in spelling its words, and any restrictions on how they can combine. Among human languages, for example, the combination cs at the beginning of a word is a very strong suggestion that the word is Hungarian, while initial cz is characteristically Polish. Polish adjectives (at least when used with masculine singular nouns in the nominative case) often end in ski. (With other genders, numbers and cases they take different endings.)
That last example illustrates that you're also likely to want to know a few grammar rules. In Italian, singular masculine nouns and adjectives usually end in o and singular feminine nouns and adjectives in a. If you were writing a story that included quite a few Italian noun-plus-adjective phrases, even a non-Italian-speaking reader might have the vague feeling that something was not quite right if you used the phrase giardino bella (beautiful garden, but with a feminine adjective after a masculine noun) late in the story.
It was something like that that enabled the copyeditor to spot that grammatical error in my Newton and the Quasi-Apple. I don't remember exactly what it was, but I do remember that the language was agglutinative, using both prefixes and suffixes to convert a basis root into things like the name of a place, an inhabitant of that place, several inhabitants of the place, the language spoken there, etc. I never explained all that; but the fact that I used the rules consistently made the language feel more real (and let the copyeditor catch me when I slipped).
In deciding what letters to use in an alien language, it's a good idea to keep in mind anything you know about its speakers' anatomy and physiology. For example, the speaker quoted in my opening sentence, with no tongue, couldn't produce many consonants. To keep the reader on your side, you'll probably want to use things that are reasonably pronounceable—that is, from which a reader can easily imagine a working pronunciation—even if things often might not be that way in reality. Most readers can invent a way to imagine “Kangyr” being pronounced when they run across it, or even (perhaps grudgingly) “Bdwdlsplg.” But using nonalphabetic symbols, as in “A%$th*s,” conveys no information about what the word actually sounds like, and is likely to achieve nothing except annoying the reader. Since annoyed readers may turn elsewhere for their entertainment, such practices are generally best avoided.
In closing I might mention a couple of additional pitfalls to watch out for in inventing alien languages. Beware of speaking of languages like “Martian"; they're on a par with “Terran” or “Human,” and if you expect your reader to believe an entire species or planetary population speaks a single language, you'd better be prepared to explain how it got that way. And if you're giving many examples of a language, don't be tempted by such shortcuts as simply changing all the vowels in sample words from some obscure human language. If you do that, your alien language will have the same underlying structure as its human model. That just isn't likely to happen, and somewhere out there is likely to be at least one reader who will catch you in the act.
Laying a solid linguistic foundation can add a lot to a story. It can be fun, and it's a fairly wide-open field, since writers so often shy away from attempting it. If you do try, your best bet is what I've already suggested. Learn the basic principles of linguistics. Study at least a couple of real languages, including at least one non-Indo-European, in some depth. Then take some of the elements you've learned—preferably enhanced by some new ones of your own invention—and work them into something fresh, new, interesting and believable.
