---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0007.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["science", "story", "fiction", "thing", "reader", "could", "like", "might", "fantasy", "may", "make", "would", "planet", "happen", "say", "impossible", "sound", "real", "principle", "time", "life", "one", "way", "travel", "physic"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0007html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 2
What Is Plausible?
The Difference Between SF and Fantasy
What does it mean to say that science fiction tries to make its speculations plausible while fantasy does not? Basically, fantasy writers don't expect you to believe that the things they're describing could actually happen, but only to pretend that they could for the duration of a story. Fantasy readers understand that and willingly play along. Science fiction writers, on the other hand, try to create worlds and futures (and aliens) that really could exist and do the things they describe. Their readers expect that of them, and write critical letters to editors and authors when they find holes in the logic (or the assumptions) that would make a science fiction story impossible.
This may sound like a rather snooty claim of superiority for science fiction and a denigration of fantasy, but it isn't. They are simply two different games. I enjoy both, when they're well played—but I think it's important to understand the difference between them and keep in mind which game is being played in any particular story. My objection to seeing science fiction awards given to fantasy stories, or vice versa, is much like the objection a sports fan might have to seeing a major baseball award given to a football player.
Often the same basic story material can be treated as either science fiction or fantasy, depending on how the writer approaches it. For example, the old fable of “The Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs” is fantasy because real geese don't lay golden eggs and the story makes no attempt to convince you they could. It merely asks you to consider what might happen if one did. Isaac Asimov's short story “Paté de Foie Gras” takes this basic idea and turns it into science fiction by postulating a biochemical mechanism by which it could happen. He tells enough about that mechanism so that readers can judge for themselves whether it might actually work.
Both science fiction and fantasy commonly deal with things that would seem, at first glance, to be impossible. The difference is that science fiction attempts to imagine ways they could actually happen. Fantasy is fun; but for some readers, at least, there's something extra special about a story that not only stretches the imagination, but just might be a real possibility.
How science fiction creates this additional level of “suspension of disbelief” depends on the nature of the speculation. Sometimes it uses ideas that may seem far-out to a layman who doesn't follow developments in science and technology, but are clearly based on well-established principles easily recognizable to someone who does follow such developments. An example would be almost any story written in the forties about space travel. Even in the fifties, when I was growing up and Sputnik I was on the verge of departure, many adults of my acquaintance considered spaceflight impossible. But readers of science magazines like Astounding and novels like those of Robert A. Heinlein and Arthur C. Clarke had long known that the possibility was clear, and only engineering problems stood in the way.
A science fiction writer will often work into the story enough explanation (an art in itself!) so the reader can see why he should see something as a real possibility, however remote, rather than a blatant impossibility. Sometimes, of course, she can only hint at it. Anne McCaffrey's Dragonflight is often mistaken for fantasy in part because there is very little explanation of what the Threads (an infestation that periodically falls from the sky) are, where they come from and how. None of the characters in the story are in a position to know these things, so most of what they say, think and do about the Threads sounds more like folklore than science. However, they stumble onto just enough hints, in the form of fragmentary old records, to show that the author did her homework—and to enable a moderately knowledgeable reader to figure out the broad outlines of the explanation: The Threads are organisms whose spores periodically cross space from another planet of the system.
Some phenomena postulated in science fiction may appear particularly impossible to a reader who is familiar with current science and technology. Examples include faster-than-light travel, time travel, telepathy and the telekinesis of Anne McCaffrey's dragons. Physics as we now know it provides no clear mechanism for such things, and in fact provides some reason to doubt they can happen. But our knowledge of real science is not fixed and immutable. We now do things in everyday life (such as writing this book on a powerful computer that sits on an old typewriter table in my home office) that would have seemed at best highly unlikely just a few decades ago. Some physicists have lately even begun speculating on ways that things like faster-than-light travel and time machines might be possible! (See, for example, the Cramer and Donaldson articles in the References.)
If you do use things that appear to be forbidden by the scientific principles accepted at the time you're writing, you need to be aware that you're doing it. If you want your reader to accept it as a real possibility, you have to assume (and implicitly invite him or her to assume) that some new scientific principles have been discovered between now and the time your story takes place. This might very well happen; scientific worldviews have been revolutionized several times in this century alone, by such concepts as relativity, quantum mechanics, the double helix of DNA and plate tectonics. But if you make such an assumption and you want to be convincing about it, you need to formulate your new principles in such a way that they don't contradict the old ones in the areas for which we already have data. And you need to work out the logical implications of your new assumptions—which quite often, as in The Sins of the Fathers, will turn out to generate important parts of your story.
That may sound a bit intimidating if you don't think your grasp of science is up to doing such things. It isn't really as fearsome as it sounds; you don't necessarily have to be a professional scientist to do a good job on the scientific aspects of science fiction. First, many forms of space travel, time travel, etc., have become so familiar that science fiction readers no longer need to be convinced of their basic possibility. Many writers who aren't that interested in the mechanisms per se merely adopt one of the general forms that have become widely accepted, and use it as needed to tell their story. Second, there are ways to learn what you need for a story (and doing so is an important part of the job).
I'll say more about these matters in the last chapter. For now, let's just say that anything that can't be rigorously proved impossible with current knowledge is fair game for science fiction. In general, if it appears to be impossible, you'll strengthen your credibility by providing some sort of explanation. Whether you're dealing with the clearly possible as already foreseen by present science, or the farther-out that goes beyond present science, you need to know at least the basics of what present science says. So we'll concentrate on that for the next several chapters.
KNOWING YOUR SCIENCES
There's a great deal of evidence that the laws of nature are the same throughout the universe. This fact enables us to make reasonable guesses about what sorts of things might exist in other parts of it. We would not expect, for example, to find civilizations growing in atmospheres consisting principally of hydrogen and oxygen. The laws of chemistry make such an atmosphere too unstable to exist, on Earth or anywhere else. Nor would we expect to find real counterparts of that hoary old cliche of monster movies, giant spiders exactly like Earthly tarantulas but a hundred times larger. A really determined science fiction writer could concoct plausible aliens that superficially looked somewhat like big spiders, but inside, they would have to be very different.
Later in this book we shall look in more detail at why such statements can be made. To be able to do that, we'll have to survey some of the basic principles of several sciences. In doing that, you may be surprised and impressed to discover just how interrelated all the sciences are.
In school, you may have gotten the impression, since chemistry class was in one room and physics in another and biology in still another, that each science is a separate little box of knowledge having little connection to the others. Nothing could be further from the truth, and nowhere is this more apparent than in trying to imagine what kinds of worlds and life-forms might exist.
Physics is the foundation; a few brief principles govern everything that happens in the physical universe. (This doesn't mean it's trivial, of course; understanding just what those few principles mean and working out all their implications is far more than the work of a single lifetime! On the other hand, adults who claim to know nothing of physics are magnificently mistaken. They may not know the academic formalisms of physics, but organisms who don't understand many of the principles don't survive to adulthood!)
Some of the implications of physics are astronomy and chemistry. Given the fundamental nature of matter, energy and how they interact, it becomes inevitable that elementary particles will form into atoms that behave in certain ways, including combining into molecules and crystals with the qualities we call chemical properties. It is similarly inevitable that large aggregates of matter will collect and turn into things like stars, planets and galaxies, which show certain kinds of behavior both individually and collectively.
In some of those concentrations of matter, chemical reactions may become very complex, leading to the special kinds of things we call life. Exactly how that happens is shaped by the laws of chemistry, which are in turn shaped by those of physics. Once life is established on a planet, it is very much shaped by astronomy. The kinds of life that can evolve on a planet like Earth are very different from those that might be found, say, on Jupiter.
As a simple but dramatic example of how true this is—how completely our astronomical background shapes and permeates every aspect of our lives—consider the Earth's axial tilt. Earth is, of course, the only planet whose life-forms most readers of this book have any firsthand knowledge of. An astronomer might describe the general nature of the Earth by specifying such numbers as its mass, its average radius, how far it is from what kind of a Sun, and so on. One of those numbers is the axial tilt. That's the angle by which the planet's axis of rotation is tilted from the perpendicular to the plane of its orbit. (If that sounds frighteningly technical, don't worry about it. I'll explain in more detail, with pictures, in the next chapter.)
Stated in such dry terms, axial tilt may sound like a very academic concept of concern only to astronomers. In fact, it's of fundamental importance to everyone and everything that lives on this planet. If you changed it from its real value of 23.5° to, say, 0.2°, virtually the entire body of human literature would have to be rewritten—not trivially, but radically. Why? Because seasons—winter, spring, summer and fall in temperate zones; wet and dry seasons in the tropics—pervade virtually everything about human life. And that 23.5° axial tilt is the main reason for the existence and nature of seasons, and for the existence of tropical, temperate and arctic regions.
With other things being equal and axial tilt reduced to essentially nothing, seasonal variations and everything that depends on them are also reduced to essentially nothing. “The winter of our discontent …,” “The flowers that bloom in the spring …,” and “The good old summertime …” are all meaningless phrases to beings who have no winter, spring or summer. Plots that depend on enduring a hard winter, or hoping the rains come in time to save the crops, would neither happen nor be intelligible on a world that has no seasons because it has no axial tilt. Human literature is just full of things that are shaped, explicitly or implicitly, by the fact that Earth has seasons. If you make the axial tilt appreciably less (or more) than it is, all those things will be very different.
It is possible to imagine alien life-forms and intelligences that don't evolve or live on planets at all. Such things could conceivably arise on neutron stars or in interstellar space itself, though they would necessarily be very different from us. We will look a little closer at such possibilities in a later chapter; but for most of this book we will be most interested in intelligences that arose more or less as we did, on planets.
HUMOR: A SPECIAL CASE?
You can't judge a caricature by the same standards as a photograph. A caricature deliberately distorts and exaggerates reality, sometimes just to be funny and sometimes to make a point about reality by calling attention to a particular aspect of it.
A similar relationship exists between humor—especially farce and satire—and “serious” writing. In a predominantly serious story, you will want to create a convincing illusion of reality—the feeling that what the reader is reading could really happen. If one of your main goals is to be funny, you may not want to do that. Funny things happen in real life, but seldom in such concentrated sequences as in a good piece of comedy. Humor usually depends on exaggerating or distorting reality to some extent. Does that mean that the usual requirements for plausibility don't apply to humorous science fiction, and anything goes?
Not exactly. It doesn't mean you can get away with anything, but it does mean you can get away with more than in a straight story. The aliens in Poul Anderson's “Peek! I See You” or Grey Rollins's “Victor” stories are pretty unlikely sorts. Victor resembles an upright three-foot sausage with stubby legs, a single eye, a “voice” system operating like a loudspeaker and capable of imitating any sound from a mouse to a symphony orchestra, a long prehensile tongue, and a taste for well-aged garbage. If you met him in a story of solemn tone, you might wonder how such an improbable critter could have evolved. But when the author is obviously not taking himself too seriously, you might go along with him and enjoy the ride. Victor isn't impossible, just unlikely. If you find the story amusing enough, you may be willing to accept his existence and not press the question of how he got that way.
In other words, readers are more tolerant of the improbable in humorous stories than in serious ones—but they'll still balk at the impossible. And the more improbable it is, the funnier it had better be. Just plain wrong science, especially if it doesn't have to be wrong for the sake of the story or the joke, simply turns readers off. Sound simply doesn't travel in a vacuum, and science fiction readers won't go along with a joke that requires them to believe that it does. If you're telling a funny story of aliens that doesn't depend crucially on where they're from, don't say they came from a planet or star system that is not likely to produce life. Use one that could, or simply make up a name.
In general, the less stretching or distorting you have to do the better. Stretch only the points that directly contribute to the humorous effect. You'll probably find that you actually enhance that if you make the rest of the background as solid as you can, and avoid including a lot of unnecessary detail.
