---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0009.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["life", "one", "planet", "might", "atmosphere", "organism", "dna", "even", "earth", "may", "would", "could", "oxygen", "many", "energy", "molecule", "form", "carbon", "way", "hydrogen", "strand", "example", "much", "like", "book"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0009html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 4
Biochemical Basics
In this book we shall take as a fundamental assumption that advanced life-forms must either evolve from more primitive ones and ultimately from an originally lifeless world, or they must be created by other advanced organisms that did so. Thus you cannot have humans, or their counterparts on some other planet, without the whole web of interdependent plants and animals that surround them—and the whole chain of ancestors that led from a raw planet to that ecosystem. You can imagine an apparent exception—a world on which one species has wiped out all other natural life-forms and invented entirely artificial means of sustaining itself (as some humans seem bent on doing)—but the exception is only apparent. If the other natural parts of an ecosystem hadn't been there originally, the surviving species wouldn't be there either.
LIFE ON EARTH
In thinking about how life originates and develops, we shall be forced to draw heavily on the one example we know of a planet on which that happened. As with stellar evolution, we have no eyewitnesses who watched the process, so we will have to rely heavily on inference and experiments with potentially pertinent chemistry. And (even worse than with stars!) we have no direct evidence about how typical what happened here is. Nevertheless, it's all we have.
At first glance, it might seem that this one little planet offers an enormous range of life-forms, many of them so obviously different that one might suspect them of representing a large sample of independent instances. Earthly life-forms include Streptococcus bacteria, basilisk lizards, lilies of the valley, zebras, aardvarks, sword-fish, rattlesnakes, giant sequoias, blue whales, hummingbirds, morel mushrooms, the Great Barrier Reef, black widow spiders, alligators, and us—just to name a very, very few. There are lichens growing in the frigid wastes of Antarctica, and fish living in hot springs that would cook “normal” fish. In the past there were many others, such as tyrannosaurs, trilobites and giant dragonflies. Surely a diverse lot—yet at the fundamental level, they are all so similar that they are probably products of a single “biogenesis.” All terrestrial life is, in a real and important sense, just one example with many variations on a basic theme.
That may seem an extreme statement, but there's a great deal of evidence to support it, much of which has just come to light in the last few decades. As wildly diverse as my examples seem, every one of them is composed of one or more cells. Those cells show a great deal of similarity in their structure and functioning. The same chemical reactions for extracting energy from food occur in organisms that would seem utterly unrelated. When important molecules exist in two versions (stereoisomers) which are mirror images, with no obvious advantage in choosing the “left-handed” or “right-handed” isomer, all organisms have chosen to use only one—the same one. And they all use the same kind of molecule, DNA (deoxy-ribonucleic acid), for storing and transmitting the information needed to make copies of themselves.
It's not easy to define life, especially with only one example to work with. Attempts to do so have commonly boiled down to saying, “I know it when I see it; now let's try to figure out what all the variants I recognize have in common.” We can probably agree that living things, regardless of their specific form,
1. are highly organized structures.
2. take in energy from their surroundings and use it to maintain their structure and organization.
3. have the ability to reproduce, i.e., to make more or less exact working copies of themselves.
Each of these statements is subject to some qualification and clarification (for example, not every individual actually uses the ability to reproduce, and the offspring of sexually reproducing species are seldom identical to their parents), but given that, these are all characteristics that we expect of any life-form on Earth (and likely elsewhere). Others, such as the ability to move around or to learn from experience, are less general. We expect them of some organisms (such as a prospective tennis partner) but not of others (such as a stalk of broccoli to be served under sauce hollandaise).
Earthly organisms acquire the energy they need to maintain themselves in a variety of ways. Until recently, it was assumed that they all got their energy from the Sun, directly or indirectly. Green plants use sunlight directly, with water, minerals and carbon dioxide as raw materials, making carbohydrates, giving off oxygen and storing energy in their own tissues. Fungi or animals get their energy by eating those tissues and metabolizing the carbohydrates, and give off carbon dioxide that can be reused by plants. Still other animals (carnivores) can eat the animals that ate the plants; smaller organisms eventually recycle their bodies back into soil as plant nutrients. You see in this bare-bones summary the beginning of ecology: No organism exists in isolation, but all interact to keep cycles of chemical reactions going over and over, with chemicals being repeatedly reused and only energy added from outside.
The essential input is energy, not solar energy. We can no longer say, even on Earth, that the Sun lies at the root of all energy cycles. Recent deep ocean explorations have discovered whole ecosystems based on chemical synthesis on the ocean floor, far from Sol's reach. The food chain here starts with microorganisms that directly metabolize hydrogen sulfide and minerals in warm water seeping up through vents from the Earth's interior. (See the Ballard and Grassle article in the References.)
You can find chemical details in standard references, but central facts you should keep in mind are these: Biochemical reactions involve complex compounds of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus and sulfur, largely because of carbon's unique ability to form big, complex molecules (such as sugars, nucleic acids and proteins). In terrestrial life, these reactions normally take place in water solution—a liquid medium in which chemical “building blocks” can roam around and bump into others with which they can react.
The Importance of DNA
One kind of molecule is of unique and central importance be cause of its role in reproduction: DNA. By now practically everyone at least recognizes “the double helix,” consisting of two very long molecular strands spiraling around each other (see figure 4-1) in a way that looks remarkably like the caduceus long used as a symbol of medicine. Each strand is a string of building blocks called nucleo-side phosphates. Each nucleoside phosphate in turn consists of still smaller units called sugars, bases and phosphates.
FIGURE 4-1 The structure of DNA (highly simplified schematic).
The crucial importance of DNA is threefold. First, it carries a complete set of instructions for building an entire organism. Second, it can make exact copies of itself. Third, if for some reason a copy fails to be exact—if a “mistake” is made in the process of DNA replication—the new DNA carries a changed set of instructions and will grow a changed kind of organism. The first two of these characteristics are the molecular basis of reproduction. The third is the basis of evolution.
I do not plan to go into the specifics of how the instructions encoded in DNA are carried out. The details of cellular reproduction in Earthly organisms are complicated and treated at length elsewhere. If you need them for a particular story, you can find them in the References. But you should have clearly in mind the basic picture of how DNA can carry information, how it makes copies, and how the copies can change.
The key to all that is in fact a kind of lock-and-key arrangement. Figure 4-1 may strike you as resembling a twisted ladder, with rungs consisting of pairs of bases, one sticking out of a nucleoside phosphate on each of the two strands. There are four bases that can be used: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T). Only certain pairs of them can combine to form rungs of the DNA ladder: Adenine will combine only with thymine, and cytosine only with guanine. Nucleoside phosphates containing the four bases can be arranged in any order along one strand of a DNA molecule, but once you specify the sequence of bases along one strand, the sequence along the other is automatically determined. For example, if one strand contains the sequence ATT G C A, the corresponding section of the other strand must be T A A C G T. So the instruction book for growing a sea urchin or a senator is written in a four-letter code consisting simply of the order of bases along one strand of DNA.
Cells reproduce by dividing, and in that process the two strands of DNA separate, each rung breaking apart where its two bases join, a little like a zipper unzipping. Each strand has a row of bases sticking out, each of which would like to combine with another base of the one kind that fits it. An important function of the “maintaining reactions” mentioned earlier is to build up nucleoside phosphates from the simpler raw materials taken in as food, so each single DNA strand will now find itself in a medium well-stocked with the building blocks to replace the “missing” strand. When a nucleoside phosphate containing adenine bumps into a thymine projecting from the single strand, it can latch on. Eventually, complementary nucleoside phosphates will latch onto every base along each of the two strands of the original double helix. When that process is complete, each strand has grown into a new double helix exactly like the original. That process is the central event in all Earthly reproduction.
If it always worked perfectly, every organism would be exactly like every other organism—and since the first organisms must have been extremely simple, we would all be much too simple to write or read this book. Fortunately for us as a species, though unfortunately for some individuals, DNA replication doesn't always work perfectly. Factors such as radiation or chemicals in the environment can cause mutation—a change in the sequence along a DNA strand. A base might be deleted, replaced by another, or trade places with another. For example, if the second thymine in my sample sequence A T T G C A is somehow removed, you're left with A T G C A. That's a different genetic “word,” and something about the organism built from the revised instructions will be different from the original—for example, eyes might be brown instead of blue. oust what will be different is a more complicated question than you might guess, since each segment of DNA can influence more than one trait, and a trait can be influenced by more than one segment of DNA.)
Thus DNA, with the help of environmental disturbances, provides not only a mechanism for usually making identical copies, but also one for sometimes making something new. That is the first requirement for evolution. Once such a mutation has occurred, the new organism has a chance to reproduce itself, because the mutated DNA will (usually) replicate itself exactly like any other DNA. However, at the organism level, other influences may keep the mutated organism from making many more copies of itself.
Mutation is essentially a random process. Sometimes the resulting change in an organism will enhance its chances of surviving long enough to reproduce, but more often the effect will be inconsequential or harmful. It's a little like trying to fix a fine watch by dropping it off a tall building. If you drop enough watches off enough tall buildings, once in a great while one of them may land in just the right way to fix what ails it—but the vast majority of them won't.
So mutation is just one part of evolution. You need it to get new kinds of organisms, but then natural selection must operate. Mutations that interfere with an organism's ability to survive or reproduce will tend to die out. The few mutations that improve those abilities will tend to become more numerous. So mutations and the things that cause them are neither unmixed blessing nor unmixed curse. Too few of them in the past and we wouldn't be here; too many now and we'd be plagued with birth defects.
Evolution and Reproduction
Many other factors affect evolution, and I'll say more about them in the next chapter. For now, there's just one that merits special mention: sex. Sex is extremely important in biology because it provides an additional, and powerful, way for organisms to try out new forms, even in the absence of mutations.
The most primitive single-celled organisms on Earth—which for some three billion years were the only organisms—are the prokary-otes (or procaryotes), which include blue-green algae and bacteria. Prokaryotic cells are relatively simple and reproduce asexually. Each cell carries a single set of chromosomes (“genetic instruction books”) consisting entirely of DNA and reproduces simply by making an extra copy of that DNA and dividing.
Eukaryotes (or eucaryotes) have considerably more complicated cell structure, with internal membranes and substructures including a nucleus in which the genetic material is concentrated. Their chromosomes are also more complicated structures (though the genetic information is still coded in DNA)—and come in pairs. That's where sex comes in. Instead of a new organism being built from an exact copy of a single parent's DNA, it gets one chromosome governing a given set of traits from each of two parents. The offspring's actual makeup is determined by the combined effect of the two chromosomes. The details are too complicated to go into here, but are readily found in books and articles on genetics (such as Griffiths et al). The most important fact is that genetic information is distributed among several pairs of chromosomes (humans have twenty-three plus one “special” pair), and each parent contributes a randomly selected member of each pair. Thus sex allows essentially every new organism to try out a new design, by combining old characteristics in new ways.
The Origin of Life
How did all this begin? Again we must rely on educated guesses as to how it happened. Several theories have been put forth, and the votes aren't all in. From a science fiction writer's point of view, it's important to bear in mind that even if one of these theories could be proved to be The Way It Happened, that does not mean all the others must be relegated to the scrap heap. Life probably began only once here, and thus used only one of the proposed methods, but it may have originated in other ways in other places.
One hypothesis concerning the origin of life on Earth is that it didn't originate here at all. Panspermia is the idea that we evolved from dormant spores that drifted here from life evolved elsewhere. Some life-forms produce spores that can survive long periods of dormancy, even under the adverse conditions they might encounter in interplanetary or interstellar space. Under some conditions such spores could escape a planet's atmosphere, be blown out of their planetary system of origin by the “solar wind” from its sun, and eventually be captured by the gravity of a quite distant planet. Even if it didn't happen here, some version of panspermia could happen somewhere. The Threads in Anne McCaffrey's Dragonflight (organisms whose spores travel from one planet of a system to another when they are close together) are a good fictional example.
Panspermia does not really answer the general question of how life originates from non-life. Even if life on this or some other planet developed from spores evolved elsewhere, we're still left with the question of how it originated there. As it turns out, it's so easy to imagine ways that that could happen that most scientists find it an unnecessary complication to look for an extraterrestrial origin for terrestrial life. Any of several scenarios could have done the trick right here.
The original atmosphere of any planet is likely to approximate the composition of Jupiter's, with a prevalence of hydrogen, helium, methane, ammonia, carbon dioxide and water vapor. A massive planet far from its sun will retain that kind of atmosphere because its gas molecules will not move fast enough to escape its strong gravitational field. Small and/or close-in planets (like Earth) will tend to lose much of that atmosphere. Hydrogen and helium, in particular, are so light that they can easily escape a relatively weak gravity, especially if they're getting lots of thermal energy. Even if the original atmosphere is completely lost, though, it may be replaced by a new one consisting of “outgased” material—i.e., gases released from the planet's interior. Volcanos, for example, emit substantial quantities of gases, many of which can be too heavy to escape the planet's gravity.
Until recently, it was generally assumed that such a secondary (but still early) atmosphere would be much like the primary atmosphere, but without much elemental hydrogen and helium—in other words, methane, ammonia, carbon dioxide and water vapor. (You'll note that elemental oxygen is conspicuously absent from the list.) Both theory and simulation experiments suggest that, given oceans of water under such an atmosphere, the energy provided by such sources as solar ultraviolet radiation and electrical storms would cause chemical reactions producing complex organic molecules, leading in geologically reasonable times to the ones we call life.
Another model that has recently been gaining favor pictures an early Earth with an atmosphere heavy in carbon dioxide and nitrogen. This is not so favorable for “in-house” production of organic molecules, but there is also now evidence that those are sometimes formed in space and could have been brought here by comets and meteorites. Still others suggest that life could have originated not in the oceans, but in clays (which are soils consisting of very fine particles).
More study will be needed to determine which of these processes (or perhaps some other not yet identified!) was responsible for the origin of life on Earth. In the meantime, science fiction writers are free to consider any of them as possibly occurring somewhere and perhaps playing a role in a story.
Now, how about that oxygen atmosphere? Actually, of course, our atmosphere is only about 20 percent oxygen, most of the rest being nitrogen. (We would find an atmosphere containing much more oxygen toxic.) But the oxygen is the part that we use most directly, in the largest quantities, and simply can't do without. You'll recall that it was not a significant ingredient in any of the early atmospheres we've considered. Any elemental oxygen that was there would tend to combine into things like water and carbon dioxide. So how did it come to be the second most abundant ingredient of our present atmosphere?
Answer: It is a product of, and not a precondition for, life. The earliest life-forms on Earth had to make do without it, but some of them produced it as a by-product of photosynthesis. Since oxygen is highly reactive, it would tend to oxidize, or combine with, many other things, which would tend to keep much oxygen from accumulating in the atmosphere. (Hence the term “reducing” as a sort of opposite to oxidation—i.e., something else combining with oxygen.) That was a good thing for early life-forms, since they were among the things that could be oxidized. (As are we; as Carl Sagan wrote in Intelligent Life in the Universe, “In a very real sense, we Earthly organisms are living in a poison gas.”)
However, one of the best reducing agents is hydrogen, which is also the lightest of all elements, and therefore the one that, in its elemental form, can most easily escape from the atmosphere. Ultraviolet radiation sometimes broke up molecules in the early atmosphere, and hydrogen thus liberated sometimes escaped. So, over long periods of time, the amount of hydrogen in the atmosphere declined, and the amount of elemental oxygen slowly increased. Eventually other organisms evolved that could use oxygen to extract more energy from food. So our world gradually moved toward the situation we now consider “normal,” with an oxidizing atmosphere maintained by a balance between oxygen-breathing animals and oxygen-producing plants. This atmosphere would have been highly toxic to many of the earliest organisms, and the transition to it, although a slow process, might very well be viewed (at least from their standpoint) as the greatest ecological catastrophe in our planet's history.
ALIEN ALTERNATIVES
Which properties of life as described so far are universal characteristics of all life, and which are local peculiarities of our particular kind of life? The question is of special interest to science fiction writers, because our job is to explore as wide a range of possibilities as we can.
Some years ago I attended a colloquium at a well-known oceano-graphic institution, with the title “Is There Non-Aqueous Life on Other Worlds?” The title was a bit shortened for euphony; the speaker's actual subject was life with a chemistry not based on carbon with water as a reaction medium. To me and much of the audience, he seemed unduly determined to believe that the answer to his question was no. At one point, to support that view, he held up the Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. “There is simply no other element,” he proclaimed, “that can form the great variety of complex compounds that carbon can. Just look at how many pages of this book are devoted to compounds of carbon, and how few to compounds of everything else.”
“But isn't it just possible,” asked an irreverent listener, “that the amount of space devoted to carbon might be influenced by the fact that that book was compiled by carbon-based, aqueous researchers?”
The question seemed to me a very good one. Naturally human beings, whose whole lives are based on carbon reactions carried out in water, would tend to consider them the most interesting area of chemistry. On the other hand, to be fair to that colloquium speaker, carbon does have an exceptional, if not completely unique, ability to form the kinds of complex molecules that life needs. Is that ability really unique, or are there other ways to do it?
Silicon is the one candidate that appears to show some promise. Its chemistry is in many respects similar to that of carbon, and it has the advantage of being highly abundant, especially on smallish planets like Earth or Mars. However, by itself it is not as well-suited to forming long chains as carbon is, and at temperatures like those on Earth, it tends to form hard crystalline structures. Some organisms use such silicon compounds because of their rigidity, in such structures as shells, but in general it's a disadvantage—life needs flexibility.
However, the “backbone” of an “organic” molecule doesn't necessarily have to consist of only one kind of atom. Silicon can form long chain molecules with properties better suited to the needs of life, called silicones, by alternating with oxygen, with methyl (CH3) groups attached to the silicons along the chain as in figure 4-2. Poul Anderson and others have suggested that life based on silicones might occur in hot planetary environments. Isaac Asimov has taken the suggestion a step further: Fluorine might replace the hydrogens to form “fluorosilicones” that might serve as a basis for life on even hotter worlds. (Fluorine forms exceptionally strong bonds, so its compounds can be stable at higher temperatures than similar compounds of other elements.)
As a science fiction writer, you may find it useful to know that such possibilities exist. However, if you want to do much more than mention them in passing, you'll need to take a much closer look at their chemistry. Those are much beyond the scope of this book, and in fact these particular possibilities are so exotic that even a chemist would likely have to do some research before saying anything very definite about them. This is not intended to discourage you from using them, provided you're prepared to do the necessary homework. Writers are often advised to “Write what you know.” Less often heard, but no less important, is the corollary: “If you don't know it, learn it!” In writing science fiction you will often have to deal in some detail with something that you don't already know. So you need to be prepared to familiarize yourself with new areas, by means ranging from standard reference books to interviews with specialists.
FIGURE 4-2 A portion of a silicone chain.
However, you will have to decide how much research you want to get into in a particular case. If you happen to be a biochemist, you may want to tackle something as ambitious as working out the whole biochemistry and ecology, in the manner of Hal Clement, of a world where those things are based on fluorosilicones. If you have only a rudimentary knowledge of chemistry and want to get a reasonable amount of fiction written in a reasonable time, you'd probably better stick to more familiar territory.
Even there, things may vary considerably from what we're used to. I'll sketch some of the possibilities, any of which may be useful in stories, but always subject to the kind of caution I've just indicated. If you can imagine a really new kind of life, and make it convincing, that accomplishment will do much to make your story stand out from the crowd. But the more exotic you get, the more background work you must do, and the easier it is to make mistakes. As with so many other things, the potential rewards are roughly proportional to effort and risk!
What are some of the other possibilities for carbon-based life? For one, remember my earlier mention of stereoisomers. Experiments aimed at simulating the conditions that led to the synthesis of the first biological molecules on Earth produce equal quantities of “left-handed” and “right-handed” molecules of a particular type, yet terrestrial biology has chosen one version over the other. We don't know any reason why the handedness chosen should be intrinsically preferable; apparently evolution just happened to select one set. If that's true, another planet might evolve very similarly to Earth, but choose the opposite handedness for all the organic molecules that occur in two stereoisomers—or perhaps only some of them. In such a case, food evolved there that looked indistinguishable from something grown here would be quite indigestible for us (and vice versa).
How will genetic information be stored and transmitted on other worlds? Is DNA the only medium available, or might there be other molecules that can function similarly and have become the biological standard on other worlds? Even if DNA is used, the code may not be based on a double, but a triple helix. Such things occur in some Earthly cells, and Joan Slonczewski, in her story “Microbe,” has imagined a whole ecosystem based on it.
Might plants on some planets use something other than chlorophyll in photosynthesis? It may be that some other molecule could play a similar role—and perhaps even play it better on a planet whose sun puts most of its energy into a different part of the spectrum than ours. For that matter, we have already seen, in the case of those deep-sea vents, that the energy input to drive an ecosystem can come from some other source altogether rather than from sunlight. Might geothermal energy play a larger biological role on some worlds than it does here? Arthur C. Clarke described one such system, on Jupiter's satellite Europa, in his novel 2010.
How about the solvent in which biological reactions take place and the atmosphere in which the entire ecosystem is immersed? In our case, these are respectively water and a nitogen-oxygen mixture with smaller amounts of other gases. (Even many purely aquatic animals depend on elemental oxygen dissolved in the water.) Other types of planets, with different kinds of oceans and atmospheres, may use different reactions to survive and utilize local conditions. Poul Anderson has described several such possibilities in chapter five, “Life As We Do Not Know It,” of his book Is There Life on Other Worlds?
Some subjovian planets might have warm temperatures (thanks to the now-familiar greenhouse effect), liquid water and ample supplies of materials that can eventually produce life. Isaac Asimov suggested that early plants on such a world could use an analog of photosynthesis (catalyzed by something other than chlorophyll) to split water into hydrogen and oxygen, react the oxygen with methane to form carbohydrates and release the hydrogen. The hydrogen in turn could react with atmospheric carbon dioxide to form more methane. Such a process could eventually lead to an atmosphere consisting largely of hydrogen, ammonia and methane. The atmospheric balance could be maintained by hydrogen-breathing animals eating plants, breaking down their carbohydrates, and exhaling methane and water vapor. (For a more detailed account, see Asimov's article, “Planets Have an Air About Them.”) In terms of the roles of oxidation and reduction, this is a sort of “opposite” of the balance we have on Earth; but it might work better where lots of free hydrogen is available but free oxygen isn't.
Anderson acknowledges that, for one reason or another, the exact scheme proposed by Asimov might turn out to be unworkable—but goes on to point out that many others can be imagined, some of which probably are viable somewhere. Cold planets with hydrogen atmospheres, for example, might have ammonia oceans, and ecosystems in which plants make unsaturated hydrocarbons instead of carbohydrates, which hydrogen-breathing animals eat, saturate and break down into simpler compounds, exhaling methane. Some variation of such an arrangement might be workable on a wide range of largish planets, from superterrestrials to jovians.
Thick atmospheres imply (again, because of the greenhouse effect) that the surfaces and deeper layers of such planets will be warmer than you might expect, even around weak suns or relatively far from stronger ones. However, they also make it hard for visible or ultraviolet radiation, needed for photosynthesis or similar reactions, to penetrate very deep into the atmosphere. This may imply that such reactions can take place only in the upper layers of such atmospheres. So be it: Much the same is true of Earth's oceans, yet rich ecosystems persist in the depths, fueled by materials that drift down after being photosynthesized near the surface. The analogy is even better than you might think, since pressures are so high deep in the atmosphere of a planet like Jupiter that conditions there are in many ways more like Earth's oceans than its atmosphere. For example, large animals could “swim” there, as in Arthur C. Clarke's “A Meeting With Medusa” or Rick Cook and Peter L. Manly's “Symphony for Skyfall.”
Those Antarctic lichens and hot-spring fish show a startling range of temperature adaptations here on Earth, but do they really represent the extremes of what's possible? Probably not. An extremely cold planet with very high atmospheric pressure, for example, might have oceans of liquid methane. These could dissolve lipids, a class of compounds that includes oils and fats and can form things as complex as proteins. The life on Hal Clement's Mesklin, in Mission of Gravity, is based on such a system. On very hot worlds, as already suggested, silicones or fluorosilicones might provide a foundation for life. Or perhaps fluorocarbons (analogs of hydrocarbons, with hydrogen atoms replaced by fluorine), with liquid sulfur as a solvent.
Early science fiction stories sometimes featured aliens who breathed fluorine or chlorine instead of oxygen. As astronomers learned more about planet formation and the origins of life, this came to seem unlikely since neither of those elements is likely to be an important constituent of a primitive planetary atmosphere—but then, as Hal Clement pointed out, neither is free oxygen. Might there be planets on which life originated and then created a chlorine-or fluorine-based atmosphere, somewhat as life on Earth created an oxygen-based atmosphere? Maybe, subject to certain rather esoteric conditions. Dr. Stephen L. Gillett, in his article “Those Halogen Breathers,” has expounded in some detail upon those conditions, and even dropped some hints as to how they might generate stories.
Dr. Gillett has also taken such a look at ways sulfur might play a central role in life, in the article “Fire, Brimstone—and Maybe Life?” Hal Clement's novel Iceworld features aliens from an extremely hot world who breathe gaseous sulfur; the “ice planet” they must deal with is Earth. In the light of later knowledge, Gillett is skeptical about the way Clement's aliens use sulfur (though he still admires the story). However, he goes on to explore a number of other possibilities that might hold up even under present-day scrutiny, including sulfur-based microbes on Io, sulfuric acid oceans that might exist elsewhere, and the difficulties intelligent aliens might face in building a technological civilization in such a place.
So … those three basic characteristics may be about all we can agree on for life in general: highly organized structures that take in energy from their surroundings and use it to maintain their structure and organization, and that have the ability to reproduce. Beyond that, there's a vast range of possibilities for a writer to explore. As for how life originates, any or all of the mechanisms suggested as candidates for Earth may operate somewhere. Life may form in one way on some planets, and in one or more quite different ways on others. Some of those ways may be completely different from any of the alternatives I've mentioned.
One new category in particular must be added—that of “created” or “engineered” life. Humans have already demonstrated an ability to produce life-forms different from any found in nature, such as mice that produce human hormones. This is just a beginning, and an intelligent species with more experience in this area may create things that we would have to call life that are very different from “natural” forms. My story “… And Comfort to the Enemy” portrayed a highly advanced technological society that we might not even recognize as such until it was too late, because its technology was entirely biological, all its “machines” being specially developed plants and animals. I can now easily imagine our own society going down that road, and alien societies going much farther. Naturally evolved life-forms are limited by what can be done with step-by-step modification of material that has already evolved. A civilization that can create life from scratch and to order might, for example, be able to create very strong or very smart creatures far larger or smaller than would be possible with the biological materials evolved on Earth.
Even that, of course, does not exhaust the possibilities. In this book I'm trying to tell you about a broad spectrum of the ideas that other science fiction writers and scientists have had—but if you can come up with a brand-new one of your own, that's even better.
HOW COMMON IS LIFE? THE FERMI PARADOX
How common is life, and in particular, the kinds of life that make good story characters? The only way to get a real, definite answer to that question is to take a close look at lots of stars and any planets they may have. However, we can make some educated guesses based on the universality of physical law, and those guesses suggest that life is pretty common.
There are a hundred billion or so stars in this galaxy alone, and we have pretty good reason to believe that they're all formed by the same basic mechanism. On theoretical grounds, that mechanism seems likely to produce planets in a goodly fraction of cases. Some theorists have even suggested that essentially all stars, with the possible exception of multiple stars and those far to the left in the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, should have planets. These theories recently got some strong observational support when the Hubble telescope took an unprecedentedly detailed look at a nebula containing newly forming stars and saw what appeared to be protopla-netary disks around at least half of them.
So planets appear to be common. How many of those planets will develop life? If the processes leading to the development of life are simply a continuation of the processes that led to the development of a planet, it may well occur wherever the astronomical conditions are within certain ranges compatible with life. Since life can adapt to quite a wide range of conditions, this suggests that a large percentage of those planets—perhaps at least one in orbit around most single stars—is likely to have some sort of life. (Though not necessarily good “story” life—remember that for a majority of its life to date, Earth hosted only single-celled organisms, and those were confined to the oceans.)
Stephen H. Dole, in Habitable Planets for Man, attempted to estimate the abundance of planets on which human beings could live without life-support systems such as domes or spacesuits. That is a sharply limited subset of “all planets with native life.” Dole assumed native life was necessary to create an oxygen-containing atmosphere that humans could breathe, but humans also have many other requirements that might not apply to all life. Dole made his estimate by making careful guesses (his reasoning is spelled out in chapter five of his book) at such factors as the fraction of stars that have suitable mass, the probability that a star has planets, the probabilities that at least one planet orbits at a suitable distance and has an acceptable axial tilt, etc. Even with all these restrictions, he estimated that there are something like 600 million human-habitable planets in our galaxy alone. Other galaxies should have comparable numbers. All of them may have additional planets where we couldn't live, but something else could.
Astronomers Frank Drake and Carl Sagan have made a different but related sort of estimate, about the number of technological civilizations with which we might be able to communicate, e.g., by radio. Their estimate, too, involves a product of factors, all of which have to be guessed. Some of them, such as the average lifetime of a technological civilization, are beyond the scope of this chapter, but we'll return to the “Drake equation” later. For now, just a bit of foreshadowing: Despite the wide variation possible in the guesses going into the final estimate, almost everyone comes up with a number so high that it would seem inevitable that we would have come into contact with at least one extraterrestrial species by now. This prediction, together with the lack of clear evidence that we have done so, is often referred to as the “Fermi paradox” (named for physicist Enrico Fermi, who asked bluntly, “Where are they?”).
The Fermi paradox has reopened a great deal of speculation about such matters as the abundance of life. Could it be that we really are alone in the galaxy, if not the universe? If so, how do we reconcile that fact with the reasons already cited for thinking life should be abundant? If not, why has there been no apparent contact?
Trying to imagine explanations for the Fermi paradox is a fruitful field for speculation by scientists and science fiction writers alike. David Brin has speculated in both capacities (see his nonfiction articles and the short story “The Crystal Spheres”). It's a theme that will return to haunt us later in this book, but a fuller discussion must wait for a later chapter. (One of the factors in the Drake-Sagan equation, for example, is the probability of an inhabited planet developing intelligent life with manipulative abilities during the lifetime of their sun.)
However, even the beginning of an answer depends on making guesses about what forms life can take, and how likely the processes that lead to it are. That depends partly on chemistry, as we have discussed in this chapter. But it also depends on mechanical factors, and how they are shaped by the environment in which evolution takes place—for bodies and minds must be equipped to function in the environments they occupy.
