---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0013.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["alien", "one", "interaction", "human", "story", "way", "might", "culture", "may", "specie", "civilization", "least", "life", "make", "could", "even", "contact", "much", "earth", "u", "possible", "chapter", "part", "would", "many"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0013html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 8
Interaction With Humans
In this chapter we begin to shift our emphasis from creating aliens to writing about them. An idea is only the starting point for a story. The essence of story is conflict—the struggles of at least one character trying to solve a problem. Usually the problem and struggle will be at least partly an interaction between characters, so the first stage in conceiving a story worth telling is to imagine two or more characters and how they might interact.
Aliens will have their own stories—their own wars, loves, quests and other conflicts for which we have no names. But telling a story containing only aliens, in a way that human readers can understand, empathize with and enjoy, is a very challenging proposition. Few writers attempt it, and even fewer succeed. I'll say a bit more about that in the next chapter, but for now let's consider a more common, and generally easier, situation. A large percentage of stories involving aliens involve their interaction with humans—a matter that can be broken down into three main problems:
1. How do we contact them or vice versa?
2. Why hasn't it already happened (or has it?)
3. Once in contact, how might humans and aliens interact?
Let's look at each of these and bear in mind that much of what we say will also apply, with little modification, to contacts not between aliens and humans, but between two different kinds of aliens.
MAKING CONTACT: THE PHYSICAL PROBLEM
Contact can be unilateral or mutual, and direct or indirect. Perhaps the most unilateral and indirect is the archaeological, in which members of one species discover another and must learn what they can about it (and perhaps themselves) from an artifact. A good example with an obvious tie to the preceding chapter is H. Beam Piper's “Omnilingual,” in which human explorers must find a way to read the language of a long-dead Martian civilization. A newer example is Maya Kaathryn Bohnhoff's “The Secret Life of Gods,” showing the perils of jumping to conclusions about what an artifact means or how it was used (an archaeologist is determined to interpret everything about a site in terms of religion, but its real explanation is much more prosaic). Others abound, as different as Arthur C. Clarke's “The Sentinel” (the basis of the movie 2001) and Rendezvous with Rama, and Michael F. Flynn's “Eifelheim” (in which the encounter occurred long ago but left traces that gradually emerge from historical records). An unusual variation is Kevin J. Anderson and Doug Beason's Assemblers of Infinity, in which the artifact is building itself—onstage—as the story unfolds.
Mostly, in this chapter, we'll be concerned with two-way contact, since that has the most possibilities for interaction. Direct, or face-to-face, contact requires getting us to where the aliens live, or them to where we live. (Or at least partway. In Murray Leinster's “First Contact,” two ships, human and alien, meet in deep space. Both must figure out how to go home without attracting the other's hostile attention to their home world.) In chapter six I indicated some of the difficulties in this—intelligent aliens seem unlikely to occur in other parts of our Solar System, and travel to any other star would be very expensive in time and money—but I also indicated that a number of ways around those problems may prove possible, even without new physics.
The ways we know about and can imagine in detail are, at best, expensive and slow. This has led many people to believe that indirect contact—the interstellar equivalent of a phone call—is likely to come first (and perhaps only). Even that is difficult because of the times involved. If we sent a radio message from Earth to Alpha Centauri, we would have to wait 8.6 years for an immediate reply sent the same way. This makes for an awkward conversation, at best. The original sender could easily die, lose interest or forget what he said before the reply came back. If the message was somehow garbled and the recipient of the original message got only enough to want to say, “Say again, please?,” the excruciatingly drawn-out non-communication could be frustrating for both sides.
And lack of results could lead to funding being cut off for attempts to detect interstellar signals. Programs do exist on Earth for SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence), but they require expensive equipment to devote large amounts of time to searching for something that may or may not be there. Even if the galaxy is full of intelligent searchers for alien intelligence, all their efforts may come to naught if nobody is making an active effort at Contact with Extraterrestrial Intelligence (COTI), as in Ian Randal Strock's story “The Ears Have It.”
What type of message could you send to beings at a great distance, whom you've never met and who will have to understand it on the first try, if at all, since there will be no opportunity for clarification? I.S. Shklovskii and Carl Sagan devoted several chapters of Intelligent Life in the Universe to this problem. The fastest and perhaps the technically easiest methods use electromagnetic radiation: radio waves or laser light. Shklovskii and Sagan discuss in considerable detail the advantages and disadvantages of both, what wavelengths might be best to use, and the kind of message that might have the best chance of being deciphered.
Their answer to this last question, which is the most plausible I've heard anyone suggest, depends on a fact that John W. Campbell summed up in three words: “Hydrogen isn't cultural.” That is, while art and philosophy may vary so much that no species can assume any element to be shared with any other species, all species are based on the same laws of physics and chemistry. Any culture that studies physical science will have descriptions of the same chemical elements, the same laws of gravitation and electromagnetism, and so forth. If scientists of one culture write enough about such things, especially with the graphic accompaniments so often useful in science, scientists of another may be able to recognize familiar patterns and so begin to get a handle on the first culture's language.
This is the key to Piper's “Omnilingual”—the “Rosetta stone” for the Martian language is a periodic table. Shklovskii and Sagan described a pictorial message that could be sent in binary code by radio or laser pulses, schematically showing such things as our general shape, the elements on which our biochemistry is based, and the general layout of our Solar System. The space probes Pioneer 10 and 11, which will drift far out among the stars, carry an etched plaque showing similar information in more clearly pictorial form.
Even if nobody makes a deliberate effort to send a message to nearby stars—and some have suggested that it might be unduly risky to try to attract such attention to ourselves—contact could still occur. Humans have been broadcasting radio-frequency signals for close to a century. The vast majority of them have not been intended for aliens, but for fellow humans on Earth—but the signals are not confined to Earth, and could be noticed and analyzed by beings quite far away. Thus we can imagine aliens making a flamboyant entrance to our world, already versed in its ways and talking like a hodgepodge of old radio and TV characters as a result of studying our broadcasts on the way—as in Stephen L. Burns's “Showdown at Hell Creek.” Or casually logging onto one of our computer nets, as in Roger MacBride Allen's “Phreak Encounter” or F. Alexander Brejcha's “Looking Through the Personals.”
Another possible method of contact is by robot probe—that is, an uncrewed spacecraft that can carry a message and/or send signals back to Earth. Our Pioneer and Voyager probes are relatively primitive examples, designed to conduct remote explorations of other planets of our Sun and then to wander off into interstellar space carrying one-way messages for anyone who might happen to find them. (See the book Murmurs of Earth, by Sagan et al.) Many variations can be imagined (Shklovskii and Sagan describe several), such as probes designed to check a succession of stars for signs of civilization and send back a report of any positive findings. Or, since it's easier to construct spacecraft that don't have to support life than ones that do, several civilizations in different solar systems might communicate only by the exchange of information and physical artifacts carried by robot ships that arrive every generation or two. A more sinister possibility is the plague of war machines programmed to destroy organic life in Fred Saberhagen's Berserker stories.
For the most part, I've restricted my discussion to things that are pretty clearly possible and can be imagined in considerable detail using only science that is already well known. However, from the science fiction writer's point of view, these do impose stringent constraints on the kinds of interaction that can occur—and even from an open-minded physicist's viewpoint, they may not be the only possibilities. If you as a writer want to have a multistellar empire, or group of empires, engaging in lively commerce or warfare, you need a way for them to travel, or at least communicate, across interstellar distances.
Thus many writers have used various forms of faster-than-light (FTL) communication and space to allow brisker interaction of widely separated beings. Ursula K. Le Guin invented the instantaneous communicator called the ansible, in The Dispossessed and other stories; both word and concept have passed into the general science-fictional vocabulary and toolkit, along with such other standard equipment as robots, spaceships and FTL itself. Several writers have used various means to let their characters travel faster than light, ranging from vaguely defined “spacewarps,” to extrapolations of real possibilities such as “wormholes” (see the Cramer and Donaldson articles), to new kinds of physics such as that postulated in my Sins of the Fathers and Lifeboat Earth.
My general advice is this: If your story doesn't need faster-than-light travel, don't use it. If it does need it, go ahead and use it—but carefully. You have two basic “safe” approaches: Take for granted a general type of FTL principle that other writers have rationalized and used enough that readers can accept it easily; or invent a new one of your own. I personally find the latter course more fun and more satisfying; but to get away with it, you have to have a pretty fair understanding of what contemporary science says, and you have to understand and accept the implications of what you're doing. I'll say more about this in chapter eleven.
WHY HASN'T IT HAPPENED? THE FERMI PARADOX REVISITED
In chapter four I briefly mentioned the Fermi paradox: The apparent contradiction between the expectation that life should be common and interstellar communication and travel feasible (though not easy), and the observation that we have no convincing evidence that anyone else has visited Earth. Let's now take a closer look at the Drake (or Drake-Sagan) equation, which estimates the number of civilizations in the Galaxy with whom we might be able to communicate (whether by radio or face-to-face) as
N = R*PneflfifcL.
Here R* is the average rate of star formation over the lifetime of the Galaxy (about one star per year). P is the fraction of stars with planets in stable orbits; ne the average number of planets per system with conditions suitable for life; f1, the fraction of such suitable planets that actually have life; fi the fraction of life-bearing planets that have intelligent life with manipulative abilities; fc the fraction of intelligent species that develop technological civilizations; and L is the average lifespan of a technological civilization. The essence of our argument in chapter four was that P and f1 seem likely to be fairly close to 1 (their maximum possible value), ne also seems likely to be about 1 (given planets, it's likely that at least one of them is in a situation conducive to life, but less likely that more than one are), and we weren't yet in a position to say much about f1, fi, fc or L.
We're now in a slightly better position, since we've looked at some of the considerations likely to influence each of those factors; but we still can't say anything very definite about them. As Donald Kingsbury has pointed out, you can't make valid statistical inferences from a single data point. We have only had the opportunity to observe one planet that has spawned a technological civilization, and we (fortunately) don't yet know how long that one will last. So we can, at best, make educated guesses about how often it happens or how long most of them survive. Not surprisingly, the guesses made by scientists looking at the problem have varied widely; but a typical result is an estimate that our Galaxy might contain about a million stars holding technological civilizations.
Typically, such stars would be separated by a few hundred light-years. Since research in the last couple of decades also suggests that starships, at least “slow” ones, are possible, planetary systems with advanced civilizations could be much more common than the preceding argument suggests. The Drake equation attempts to estimate how many stars might have native civilizations; but it now appears that once one of those reaches a certain point, it can establish colonies on others. Those can eventually repeat the process, and even one species inclined to do so could pretty well fill the galaxy in mere millions of years. That sounds like a lot to us, but it's not much in astronomical or even geological terms, and perhaps not in terms of the life expectancy of a successful civilization. We have no reason to assume there are no races that much older than us (though it is conceivable; somebody has to be first!).
So where is everybody? Our attempts at detecting alien radio signals have so far come up dry, even though the scenario just described suggests that we could easily have lots of neighbors. Nobody has found any clear and generally convincing evidence of alien visitation on Earth or elsewhere in the Solar System (though there are a few items that deserve a closer examination than they've received so far, such as the “humanoid face” on Mars described by Richard C. Hoagland). If intelligent civilizations are common, and capable of spreading through the Galaxy, it seems just a bit odd if none of them have passed this way.
Curiosity about this oddity has led to a great deal of speculation on possible reasons for our apparent solitude. The ideas range from the notion that some as yet unknown requirement for the creation of life makes it more difficult and rarer than we've guessed, to the idea that we're the first to get this far in this part of the Galaxy. Maybe the aliens are here, observing us but deliberately keeping out of sight, for any of several possible reasons. Or maybe when beings learn enough to be able to live long lives, they become afraid to take the risks that exploration and colonization would entail. (There's evidence that some humans are doing that right now!)
Far more explanations have been put forth than I can describe here. David Brin did an excellent review of the whole subject in his 1983 article “Xenology: The New Science of Asking, 'Who's Out There?' ” In that article he traced the evolution of thought about this problem and described a wide range of possible explanations for “The Great Silence.” He also invited readers to suggest their ideas, and published some of those in a follow-up article (“Just How Dangerous Is the Galaxy?”) two years later. By then the explanations had proliferated so much that he gave a full-page chart classifying them succinctly, plus more detailed descriptions of two dozen ideas grouped under the headings “Solitude,” “Graduation,” 'Timidity,” “Quarantine,” “Macrolife,” “Dangerous Natural Forces,” “Dangerous 'Unnatural' Forces” and “A Grasp at Optimism.”
None of these explanations, of course, is assumed to be the whole explanation. It's quite possible that the Galaxy contains lots of civilizations, but we've seen no evidence of this one for that reason, that one for another reason, a third for still another, and so on, with the net result that we've seen no evidence of any of them.
You may find that such discussions suggest story ideas to you; but for many stories, the question of how abundant life and intelligence and civilization are is at most a background issue. It will clearly be important if your story centers on one of the possible explanations for the Fermi paradox, or if it postulates an interstellar empire or takes its characters to many stellar systems (in which case you will need to consider who, if anybody, was already there). But if your goal is just to tell a story about a particular interaction between humans and one set of aliens, you may not be very concerned about how many other sets there might be or why we haven't heard from them. For such a story it may be enough to know that at least one other species can exist and can come into contact with us. Most stories will be about interactions that do occur, not those that don't.
KINDS OF INTERACTIONS
So what kinds of interactions might occur between humans and aliens (or between different kinds of aliens) ? I can only survey a few of the possibilities that others have thought of, and hope that will stimulate you to think of new ones. Would-be writers have sometimes asked me, “What topics are hot now?” My answer is that they should be guided by a different question; I'm not interested in repetitions of what others have already done, but in what you can do that turns my mind in a direction it hadn't thought of before.
Human-alien interactions can involve individuals, cultures or both. They can be biological, cultural or both. I offer my samples in no particular order; this is not, after all, a one-dimensional continuum.
Individual Interactions
These interactions, with the feeling of intimacy that the word implies, may occur as quiet little stories involving just a couple of beings, or as a detail in something of much larger scope. (Indeed, such details are needed in works of large scope, to help make the whole thing “real” at a level individual readers can relate to personally.)
Good examples of “quiet little stories” are Clifford D. Simak's “A Death in the House,” in which a farmer takes a dying alien into his home; and Mark Rich's “Across the Sky,” in which a human girl and a lonely alien on a park bench share parts of their very different ways of growing up (she loses a tooth, he loses part of his memory).
My Sins of the Fathers and Lifeboat Earth involve action on an enormous scale: a whole galaxy rendered uninhabitable; one species rescuing another by moving its whole planet to a different galaxy, with wholesale extinctions and massive guilt an inevitable part of the price for that much survival. But one of my personal favorite parts is this one-paragraph vignette in Sins in which Sandy, the only human who makes much effort to get to know the Kyyra ambassador Beldan personally,
… showed Beldan her oboe, as one of the rough human counterparts to his music-pipe. He watched and listened attentively as she warmed up with a few quick scales and arpeggios and then started one of the oboe solos from the slow movement of the Mahler symphony he had heard. Halfway through it, he suddenly took out his pipe and began playing along, improvising a part that was nothing Sandy had ever heard but that blended uncannily. And where the Mahler part sank back into the orchestra, she found herself improvising too, to avoid stopping. For over a minute the two of them played on, listening to each other and weaving a counterpoint that, at least to Sandy, made good musical sense. Then, partly because she was afraid she couldn't sustain it any longer, she led her part to an ending, and Beldan followed. They stopped together. For another minute Sandy sat almost breathless with exhilaration at what she thought they had done—but afraid to ask. Finally Beldan said, “That was very good,” and she knew she was right.
Of course, not all individual interactions are quiet, special shared moments. In A.E. van Vogt's “Cooperate—or Else!,” and later in Barry B. Longyear's “Enemy Mine,” it's a matter of life or death. In each case a human and an alien from warring cultures must cooperate to survive when stranded together on a hostile world.
Also in each case—and to varying degrees in my other examples—the interaction between individuals sheds light on the differences between their cultures. In the van Vogt and Longyear examples, the individual interaction is literally a part of a cultural interaction, but most individual human-alien interactions in stories will to some extent and in some way reflect in microcosm a relationship between the individuals' cultures.
Observation
Many science fiction stories overtly involve cultural interactions, which span a wide spectrum. Many deal with observation of one culture by another, with the observing group trying not to be noticed by the observed. Of course, it seldom works out that way; the story begins when they are observed despite their best efforts.
Chet and Tina Barlin, in my Newton and the Quasi-Apple, make a career of observing alien cultures. They use devices like invisible landing craft, long-distance microphones and compact telescopes to avoid direct contact with their subjects because the government that employs them has a strict policy against interference. Sometimes, though, interference seems necessary—and, of course, has consequences beyond the easily foreseen. In Newton and the Quasi-Apple they get permission to help—ever so slightly—a promising culture to survive repeated raids by barbarians. Unfortunately, the tiny advantage they introduce threatens to nip a major scientific breakthrough in the bud.
Chet and Tina's government, at the time of Newton, follows what Star Trek calls the “Prime Directive": a policy of avoiding interference with less developed cultures. In a recent editorial called “Interference,” I reexamined the question of why a civilization might choose to follow or reject such a policy. A whole range of attitudes toward the question is possible, and there is little justification for a priori assumptions about how “hands-off” or aggressive either our own descendants or any alien culture might be. The most likely general and long-term scenario, I suspect, is that any culture's philosophy will fluctuate between extremes. The same government that wanted my Barlins to keep hands off had earlier (e.g., in “War of Independence”) pursued a “Manifest Destiny” policy, colonizing everything they could get their hands on, with little regard for prior occupants.
Conquest and Colonization
This leads us to another broad category of interactions—invasion, defense, war and colonization. One of the best-known early works of science fiction was H.G. Wells's War of the Worlds, later adapted for an American audience as an Orson Welles radio play that caused widespread panic. The Martians invading Earth appeared as genocidal monsters bent on wiping us out to make room for themselves, and that still sometimes works if you can convince your readers that your aliens are so alien we can't understand what makes them tick. A successful recent example that falls roughly into this category is Joe Haldeman's The Forever War. Often, though, today's readers expect all the characters including aliens to have understandable and believable motivations.
So if you want alien invaders, you should at least think about why they would go to the trouble. Many of the old pulp conventions don't hold up unless you concoct just the right set of circumstances to make them work. Do they want us as slaves? Maybe; a highly skilled storyteller like Gordon R. Dickson can still make it believable and memorable, as in Way of the Pilgrim. To impress readers who've read that, you'll have to do it at least as well—which means you'll have to consider such questions as, “What can we do for them that their own machines can't do better and cheaper?”
Would they want us for food? We'd probably give them indigestion; if we don't, you'll need to explain (or at least be able to) why our biochemistries are that similar. Would they want our real estate? Chlorine-breathers, for example, would have little use for it. To like the kind of properly we do, they must be at least fairly similar to us—or they must be prepared to “terraform” it to their own specifications, which is a huge job. (Or to modify themselves to fit into a preexisting ecosystem without disturbing it unnecessarily, as in Joan Slonzewski's “Microbe.”)
If two cultures are enough alike to be interested in occupying the same place, many possibilities for conflict exist. Our own history suggests that a technologically advanced culture is likely to smother a less advanced one merely by coming into contact with it. Much science fiction, such as W.R. Thompson's “Ghost Dance,” is haunted by the danger of this either happening to us or being caused by us. Can the danger be avoided, if it's recognized and due precautions taken? Probably it can, but what are proper precautions—and are they always an option? Susan Shwartz, in Heritage of Flight, puts her human colonists in a situation where they must choose between their own extinction and genocide: They are stranded on a world with inhabitants who are quite likable as adults, but a literally lethal menace in their larval stage. Other writers, such as Poul Anderson in The People of the Wind and W.R. Thompson in his kya series taken as a whole (see chapter ten), show ways humans and aliens might manage to share space, retaining elements of both cultures yet adding others not found in either alone.
Numerous variations on such themes can be imagined. One (so common that a new story must come up with quite an original twist to revive it) is the multispecies galactic federation deliberating on whether to invite our species to membership or exterminate it as a threat to the others. A particularly well-developed and thought-provoking variation is the galactic “superculture” in David Brin's “Uplift” novels, including Sundiver, Startide Rising and The Uplift War. Here, species on the verge of intelligence are helped over the hump (or “uplifted”) by more advanced “patron” races, and in turn later uplift still younger “client” species.
Some stories have created unique interactions between an individual and an alien culture. Kris Neville's “Bettyann” and Laura Frankos's “Hoofer” deal in quite different ways with aliens who have found ways of fitting, at least for a while, into a human culture on Earth (but then, they have the rare ability to look human). In Clifford D. Simak's Way Station, a reclusive Wisconsin farmer is actually maintaining a way station for interstellar travelers.
Some human-alien interactions might involve religion, as with the misguided missionaries in Katherine MacLean's “Unhuman Sacrifice.” Others may involve vastly different species collaborating on an important project that neither of them could accomplish alone, as in Marc Stiegler's “Petals of Rose.”
Some human-alien relationships are patterned on well-known biological relationships, even if they can't actually be biological as we usually understand that term. The Puppet Masters in Robert A. Heinlein's novel exemplify a type of parasitism (one organism supporting itself at the expense of another). The alien detective's relationship with its human host in Hal Clement's Needle is a type of symbiosis (two organisms in a mutually beneficial interaction, each doing for the other something that it can't do on its own).
Some human-alien interactions will be unique and hard to classify—and some of those may be the most haunting and memorable of all. Consider Ted Reynolds's “Can These Bones Live?,” which might be considered the ultimate wish-fulfillment story: Humanity is extinct, but aliens revive a single individual and offer her a single wish—and a test. Or Chad Oliver's 'Transfusion,” in which a race faces aggression of such a nature and on such a scale that it needs a transfusion of really fresh ideas—so it seeds a world to grow a new species to generate them. In F. Alexander Brejcha's “With Other Eyes,” a man is forced to see not only himself but everything else through literally alien eyes—and to act as a suicide hotline for an entire species.
Finally, I should mention a few overworked types of interactions that don't seem very likely—while acknowledging that some inspired writer may find a way to turn any one of them into a fresh and memorable story. One of the old pulp conventions, for example, has alien invaders collecting Earth women for much the same purposes as certain human villains. A kinder and gentler (but no less improbable) variant is the romantic liaison between a human and an alien. Either of these might lead in careless fiction to human-alien hybrids, but in reality it would take exceedingly special circumstances to make that happen. Even if similar circumstances caused evolution to converge enough to produce aliens who were virtually identical in external appearance to humans, it's most unlikely that their genetic means to that end would be similar enough to allow interfertility.
A similar argument applies to interstellar infection, such as the “ordinary” Earthly disease that was the ultimate undoing of the Martians in War of the Worlds, or The Andromeda Strain in Michael Crichton's novel. It could happen, under very special conditions; but in general a microorganism can only infect something that it has evolved to infect. I believe it was Poul Anderson who observed that humans would be more likely to catch alfalfa wilt than most alien diseases. (On the other hand, genetic engineers have found great potential in recombinant DNA, that is, combining DNA from unrelated species to produce results not found in nature, such as bacteria that make human insulin. So even if humans and aliens can't have children together or give each other diseases by “natural” means, there may be interesting possibilities in combining their genetic material in a laboratory setting.)
Then there is the “incomprehensible” alien—the being whose ways of living and thinking are so utterly unlike those of humans that no common ground exists and no interaction is possible. This, or something like it, has occasionally been made to work in fiction. Clifford D. Simak's The Visitors is perhaps one of the purest examples—huge, mysterious objects that appear on Earth and hang around without ever revealing what they are, where they're from or why they've come. There are traces of the idea in Joe Haldeman's The Forever War and Jeffery D. Kooistra's “Sunshine, Genius, and Rust” and “Young Again,” in which there's plenty of interaction (warfare) but very little communication.
Too often, though, “incomprehensibly alien” seems more like a cop-out, a convenient excuse for the author to shirk the responsibility of figuring out what sort of interaction might really occur. Logic is not a purely arbitrary invention; if an alien being's actions strike us as illogical, it more likely indicates that we don't understand the premises on which its actions are logically based. Given enough of me right kind of effort, we should be able to determine what its fundamental drives are. Once we know that, even though we may find it hard to imagine having those drives, we should be able to understand, at least dimly, why just about any being behaves the way it does.
Especially if we want to write stories about them.
