---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0014.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["human", "alien", "story", "character", "one", "reader", "make", "language", "way", "might", "different", "even", "much", "must", "background", "thing", "two", "word", "writer", "individual", "would", "know", "like", "viewpoint", "many"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0014html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 9
Writing About Aliens
Showing Alien Character and Motivations
Writing stories about aliens requires all the skills and techniques demanded by any other kind of story, but also poses some special problems and challenges of its own. Let's look at several of these, beginning with one directly related to the note on which I ended the last chapter.
HUMANS IN FUNNY SUITS
Aliens who have evolved to be successful are unlikely to behave illogically, or at least any more so than humans do. Their behavior will grow logically out of more or less clearly defined motivations—but those motivations will not be quite the same as those of any human. (And never forget that even the motivations of individual humans, especially if they are from different cultures, may be quite different.)
The conflicts that generate aliens' stories, whether they're conflicts between different aliens or between aliens and humans, should grow out of their nature and motivations. In telling any story, it's a good idea to look at each potential turning point from the viewpoint of each character involved and let him, her or whatever make the best move possible from his own point of view. When aliens are involved, you must think out how they would see the situation, rather than making them go puppetlike through motions that you as author find convenient. In Poul Anderson's The People of the Wind, everything the Ythrians do is shaped by their background as flying carnivores who live in an essentially three-dimensional world and need lots of energy and space. In Eric Vinic-off and Marcia Martin's “The Weigher,” everything depends on a concept of honor evolved by catlike carnivores, which is subtly but significantly different from ours.
ALIENS ARE INDIVIDUALS
Just as it's unreasonable and unjust to assume that all Italians, African-Americans, Asians or WASPs fit a stereotype, you must remember that your aliens are different from each other, as well as from us. Any real planet, even if dominated by a single species, will likely have a multitude of cultures and factions. Each of those will contain an even larger multitude of individuals, each with a unique physique and psychology. How different depends on evolutionary background. On Earth, all cheetahs are very nearly identical, both superficially and genetically, but there must be some very special reason for that. Most geneticists think it suggests that cheetahs once came very close to extinction, and all those now alive are direct descendants of a very few individuals.
Sculpting alien characters into individuals is done in much the same ways as with human characters. You can give them distinctive physical characteristics, habits, attitudes and personal eccentricities such as speech habits or mannerisms. The main difference is that the limits within which individual variations fall are determined by the general characteristics of the alien species and culture rather than those of humans. Nearly all adult humans fall into a fairly narrow range of heights and weights, can eat a wide variety of foods, and enjoy interacting with others of their species. But they can be light or dark-skinned, blonde or brunette or gray or bald, tall or short, portly or thin. Some choose to be vegetarians while others hate vegetables; some are boisterous and gregarious while others are shy and reclusive. Any kind of alien is likely to show similar variety, but within a different range—and the range may be over a variable that doesn't even exist for humans.
Winged beings such as Ythrians, for example, might vary in their tastes for flying in marginal weather. Some might find it exhilarating to fight fierce winds and win, while others might hate to fly unless absolutely necessary except on calm, clear days. The kya students in W.R. Thompson's 'Touchdown, Touchdown, Rah! Rah! Rah!” are divided into factions with differing attitudes toward humans. Some individuals don't identify absolutely and unequivocally with either faction; and none of them, as a result of their herbivore background, can accept moderately violent behavior that humans consider unremarkable. A rich variety of characterization of both cultures and individuals within alien species can be found in the novels of C.J. Cherryh.
In bringing both individuals and their cultures to life, details are important—the little things that don't directly make large contributions to plot motion, but help make everything feel real and consistent. Sometimes when you start thinking about them, they suggest still others. In my Sins of the Fathers, the Kyyra, in their very first appearance, make a striking visual impression on the humans seeing them, but one of them immediately strikes the observers as older than the rest: “Hard to judge in an alien, perhaps, but old age is a matter of increasing entropy regardless of species, and this one gave that impression—through the slightly olive cast and lesser smoothness of his skin, and in a variety of other ways too subtle for Clark to put his finger on.” Soon afterward, and throughout the book, the Kyyra show two characteristic reactions to stress. When unpleasantly surprised, their eyes jerk involuntarily back into their sockets, perhaps a survival of an ancestral reflex to protect the eyes. When troubled by something that's been bothering them and won't go away, they often take out “music-pipes” and improvise snatches of melody. This started out as an analog of the way humans sometimes light up a cigarette when nervous; but then I realized that with their absolutely tonal language they might make “musical puns,” playing tunes that suggested different sentences with ironically related meanings.
THE DANGER OF LECTURING
When you're writing about human characters for human readers, you and your readers share a great deal of background knowledge that you can take for granted. You know, for example, how many arms and legs a human has, what a hug or a hot stove feels like, and the pleasures and pains a child experiences in growing up. These things aren't exactly the same for any two individuals—there's a good deal of difference between growing up on an Iowa farm and on the streets of Harlem, and a nod or a belch may mean quite different things in different countries—but there's an underlying base of things that we have sufficiently in common that they don't need to be spelled out to be understood.
When you're writing about aliens, there's much less that you can assume, and much more that you have to convey, explicitly or implicitly. Your reader does not even know at the outset whether your alien characters are ten feet or ten inches tall, whether they have arms or tentacles, or whether they like to eat fermented vegetables or still-squirming meat. So you have to give more attention to how to get background information across without stopping the story in its tracks or alienating the reader. Readers these days are not inclined to sit still through long lectures at the beginning of a story while waiting for something to happen, or in the middle, with action grinding to a halt for somebody to talk. Occasionally a bit of lecturing is unavoidable, and when that happens there are ways to make it as painless as possible; but before using them you should make every effort to find other approaches.
First, consider whether you need to tell a particular bit of information at all. I usually prefer to know as much as I can about my characters and background, and tell only what I have to.
For knowing as much as possible, when an elaborate background has to be constructed, made to fit together into a consistent whole, and kept track of, I've found it helpful to use a type of computer program called “hypertext” (see my articles in the References). If you don't have that, or don't find it congenial, you can use sheets of paper or index cards.
Once you've constructed an elaborate background, there's a great temptation to show it all off. Resist that temptation. Before including any detail in the story, ask yourself, “Does the reader need or want to know this?” If not, leave it out! In general, only include things that are necessary to make the plot intelligible or to make the setting, characters and action sufficiently vivid to form a clear, “real” picture in the reader's mind. The effort that went into creating the rest was not wasted. The fact that what you include in the story is consistent with a larger whole will add much to the story's feeling of solidity.
Things like body shape and mannerisms can often be suggested unobtrusively by having one character looking another over when they meet. More involved cultural background that is important to the story can sometimes be exhibited by arranging for at least one character to visit the culture in question, as when Sandy wangles an invitation aboard the Kyyra starship in The Sins of the Fathers. You must be careful, though, to have a suitable justification for the visit, and not to make it a mere “tour of wonders.” Sandy learns important things by looking around and asking questions about what she sees and experiences; but her visit doesn't happen until fairly late in the book, and she'd been trying for weeks to get aboard the ship, hoping to see something that would clear up a mystery that had pervaded everything that went before.
Sometimes you can turn that method around and reveal a lot about one culture by plunging one of its members into another, as in W.R. Thompson's “On Tour With Gyez,” in which a kya science fiction writer is sent on a book promotion tour on Earth.
When the action takes place entirely within an alien setting, the characters will normally take it for granted, if they live there. You can still evoke a surprisingly vivid picture of it simply by the way you coin words to describe it. Consider, for example, this paragraph from Poul Anderson's The People of the Wind:
Further down a slope lay sheds, barns, and mews. The whole could not be seen at once from the ground, because Ythrian trees grew among the buildings: braidbark, copper-wood gaunt lightningrod, jewelleaf which sheened beneath the moon and by day would shimmer iridescent.
Anderson's reader has never seen a braidbark, copperwood or jewelleaf, but gets an instant picture from each one-word name, complete with overtones like suggestions of texture.
When you must lecture, because information really needs to be conveyed and can't be fitted gracefully into dialogue and action, a variety of tricks can be used to disguise that fact, or at least make it more palatable. In The People of the Wind, Anderson puts sympathetic characters in the position of needing the information and therefore asking for a lecture, and then lets the reader watch it with them, along with the characters' reactions. If you try this, you must be prepared to make your lecturing intrinsically very interesting, and recognize that even then some readers will be tempted to skip past it.
Another approach is to dole out necessary background in small, plainly labeled bites, as G. David Nordley does in the brief excerpts from relevant documents set in italics at the beginnings of sections of his “Trimus” stories. To my mind one of the most successful approaches is one that occurs repeatedly in almost any Isaac Asi-mov novel—one character is trying to pry information out of another who's reluctant to give it. Some writers attempt this by having one character feed another questions, most of which real characters in their situation would not need to ask, simply to prompt an answer and thinly disguise a lecture as a dialogue. They miss the crucial ingredient in the Asimov dialogues—an underlying interpersonal conflict that drives the scene from beginning to end and incidentally delivers important information.
VIEWPOINTS
Having a viewpoint character observe things the reader needs to know is certainly convenient for the author, when it's feasible, but it's not always equally easy. It's easiest when you have a human viewpoint character, with whom a reader can identify. In that case the writer, reader and viewpoint character all share that common human background, and can see an alien in terms of how it compares to themselves and that shared knowledge. Sometimes, though, you might prefer not to do that—or might not be able to.
Rick Cook and Peter L. Manly's “Symphony for Skyfall” deals with the efforts of intelligent natives of Jupiter to survive the impacts of fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 on their planet. Though the story was written slightly before it happened, that was a real event, and the story was constrained by what could be known about it by Earth-based observers at that time. It was pretty certain, for example, that there would be neither humans present on Jupiter nor radio contact between us and anyone living there. Thus there was no way to have a human character on the scene, and there was plenty of story without one—the survival of an intelligent race was literally at stake. Thus the authors had to tell their story from an alien viewpoint.
That's one of the most difficult challenges in all of science fiction. The writer has to tell a story, and make a reader care about it, through characters with whom neither of them shares any background. Thus it's necessary to set the scene, establish what kinds of beings these are, and create a vivid picture of what's happening, all at once. The road is filled with pitfalls. If you make your aliens too much like us, they'll be easy to identify with, but nobody will take them seriously as aliens—they'll be “humans in funny suits.” If you make them fully as alien as they're likely to be, and insist on taking the pure, high road of not using any Earthly names for things that don't exist on Earth, you'll wind up with a story that's authentically alien but totally unintelligible. An occasional coined word, or untranslated word from an alien language, gives flavor and color; too many of them, and you convey no information.
In “Symphony for Skyfall,” Cook and Manly chose an effective compromise. It's not quite true that our world and theirs share nothing—we all have to make a living, and any ecosystem will include predators and prey. So Cook and Manly unabashedly used some English words for analogs of things in the Jovian ecosystem, to convey a quick picture to a human reader, but quickly added enough detail to make the reader fine-tune that picture. The story begins:
Shark!
Ensign stretched his timpani even tighter and listened again. The clouds swirled around his body, obscuring his own wingtips in the mist of opaque orange and pink. Wind-driven ice crystals stung against his taut membranes. The air pressed in on him thick and oppressive. He wished he were above the clouds and out in the clean sunlight with the rest of his pod….
For one word, you might think you'd been plunged into an Earthly ocean, with a character threatened by a literal shark. The very next sentence makes it clear that you're in a much more alien place. By the end of the paragraph you know the viewpoint character you've latched onto lives in the dense atmosphere of what must be a very large planet. You know that he plays a role more or less analogous to that of whales, but you also know that he is not a whale. The predator-approaching-prey image remains sharp and clear, and your mind is reset to interpret terms like “shark” differently than usual for the duration of this story.
Now consider the same two paragraphs, substituting, “Blig-gleblop” for “Shark” and “snyunk” for “pod.” If that was all you'd seen, you wouldn't have much of a picture at all. You might still be wondering—if you still cared—just what a “snyunk” was, in what sense Ensign considered it “his,” and whether a bliggleblop was somehow threatening or Ensign was getting excited about it for some other reason.
How much alien jargon and how much not-quite-appropriate English jargon to use in such a case is always a judgment call, and somebody will always disagree with the way you make it. (For some other examples of alien viewpoints, you might see Vinicoff and Martin's “The Weigher,” Thompson's “On Tour With Gyez,” and Allison Tellure's “Skysinger” stories.) Since it's so difficult to hit the right balance between the clear and the exotic with an alien viewpoint, you might prefer, when it is possible, to have at least one human character to serve as an intermediary between alien characters and reader. Of course, such a character can't be merely a passive observer. Even if your original interest in a story lies in a conflict, say, between two intelligences that arose on a single planet, once you let human observers go there they must surely be drawn into the fray, acting and being acted upon. The story will thus become something quite different from what it would have been without them.
LANGUAGE PROBLEMS
I have already hinted at some of the special problems aliens force on a writer in matters of language. The characters themselves will face even more basic ones, and the writer must decide how to deal with them to get the story moving yet keep it believable. Any time two independently evolved species come into contact, you must decide how, if at all, they're going to learn to talk to each other. Assuming that their built-in linguistic apparatus is similar enough that both of them can speak at least one of their languages, they will need time together to learn it. That's likely to be a tedious process that the reader doesn't care to spend much time on, so you may have to gloss over it, and still risk burdening your story with a period of no “real” action.
Science fiction writers have invented a number of more or less plausible ways to shortcut that awkward necessity. One of the most convenient is the translator, a “black box” or highly sophisticated computer that automatically translates one language into another. A translator between two known languages is clearly possible; primitive versions are already on the market.
A “universal translator,” which analyzes a new language and quickly prepares a program for on-the-spot translation or language instruction, is not inconceivable, but it's a lot harder than most writers seem to realize. A language is not just a code or cypher. It has a distinct structure of its own that may be so different from that of another that translation requires “melting the ideas down and recasting them in a new form.” Even a message in a highly sophisticated code developed by U.S. military cryptographers is still English at heart, wearing a disguise that can be penetrated with enough determined effort. The same message translated as accurately as possible into Navajo is so different in fundamental structure that such things were used in World War II as an “unbreakable code.”
Furthermore, merely analyzing the structure of a language is not enough—you also have to know how it relates to its subject matter. So science-fictional translators that learn a language simply by analyzing a sample of it are unconvincing. Such a machine would also have to analyze the speakers, and their surroundings and activities, for quite a while. Given the opportunity and ability to do that, and to analyze very complicated correlations, a highly sophisticated artificial intelligence might be able to do it. On the other hand, a highly sophisticated natural intelligence might do it at least as well, which is why my Chet and Tina Barlin spend a lot of time surreptitiously observing their subjects before even considering direct contact.
Sometimes, of course, that process can also be shortened. Many storybook aliens have come to Earth already armed with a fair, if oddly lopsided, understanding of human language and culture obtained by watching old television broadcasts on their way here.
Electronic and/or mechanical intermediaries are likely to prove useful in many human-alien contacts, if only for a reason I already mentioned in chapter seven: the fact that their signal-producing methods may be so different that neither can make the sounds (or light or chemical signals) used by the other. A moderately extreme example of this occurs in my “Pinocchio,” in which a computer is equipped with microphones, speakers and a monitor screen to translate dolphin utterances into human meaning. Dolphin sounds cover a much wider frequency range than human speech or hearing, but the differences go even beyond that. As the human who developed the system explains, “The phonation apparatus in [Pi-nocchio's] blowhole is divided and he can use the two halves singly, jointly or independently…. The first two columns of the [computer] display give a very free verbal translation of what he's saying, or both messages if he says two things at once. Some of the sounds carry connotations to compensate for the lack of an expressive face, and the third column has comments about those.” So Pinocchio's first bit of dialogue that my human protagonist hears looks like this on the screen:
Nothing in the chart is arbitrary; I had clearly in mind exactly what Pinocchio was doing and why each word appeared where it did. Many readers found it and its explanation interesting—once. If I had shown all of Pinocchio's dialogue that way, few readers would have had the patience to read the whole story. So I showed how it really worked once, at the beginning, and then translated later lines into colloquial English conventionally written. (Which, by the way, is usually a good way to handle any sort of accent or dialect. As Gordon R. Dickson once advised me, 'You don't want to remind the reader that he's reading!”)
Slightly less exotic forms of technological communication aids between beings with incompatible speech methods are already in use right here on Earth. Several laboratories (see my essay on “Self-Fulfilling Prophecies”) have been using such methods as keyboards with visual symbols to converse with gorillas and chimpanzees in an invented language. Early efforts to teach apes to talk had very little success, apparently because they're simply not built for human speech. Given a more congenial medium, some individuals have demonstrated an ability to use a vocabulary of several hundred words in meaningful sentences. (See Sue Savage-Rumbaugh and Roger Lewin's Kanzi: The Ape on the Brink of the Human Mind.)
Communication between beings with very different ways of talking does not necessarily require fancy hardware. Some labs have had impressive successes in teaching apes American Sign Language (Ameslan), originally developed for hearing-impaired humans. In my Tweedlioop, the communication breakthrough occurs when two children, one human and one alien, cut to the simplest approach that works while their elders dither over what they might do. Neither can make the sounds of the other's language, but both can learn to understand them. So they do.
In “Pinocchio” and many other stories, a computer will sometimes render a word of one language as UNTRANSLATABLE into the other. A colleague recently argued on a convention panel that there are no untranslatable words—any meaning can be gotten across, even if it takes ten minutes of explanation. I disagreed, but we weren't really as far apart as we sounded. I basically agreed with him in chapter eight, when I doubted that many aliens were likely to be truly and hopelessly incomprehensible. But I don't think a ten-minute explanation of a word can really be considered a translation (and I can easily think of examples that would require much more than ten minutes even to translate from academic English to street English, such as “Bessel function”). Let's just say that most languages will contain words that are not simply or easily translatable into some other languages—words that have no equivalent of comparable length and/or similar connotations.
A particular type of problem word that often comes up in science fiction is the unit of measurement. Writers sometimes like to use phrases like “nine sipaicho” to describe the distance that an alien character has to cover before nightfall, thinking it conveys some of the exotic flavor of alienness. Maybe it does, but it also conveys no information. If “nine sipaicho” is equivalent to “seven kilometers,” then seven kilometers is almost always the best translation for an English-speaking reader. {Astronomical units in everyday use present a special problem. Will “day” and “year” mean the lengths of time defined by the rotational and orbital periods of Earth, or the rotational and orbital periods of the planet in your story? You must decide, and make clear to the reader what convention you're using.)
There are better ways than meaningless words to convey the feeling of alienness and (better yet) some of the mind-set of your aliens. One is to translate literally idioms that reflect their way of viewing the world. W.R. Thompson's kya, with their herbivorous herd background, rely much more on scent and less on sight than humans, so many of their figures of speech refer to smells where ours might refer to colors or shapes. Gyez asks his guide, “Will I have some time to play tourist? I'd like to take in the scents.” A similar trick is to retain some of their characteristic thought structure when they learn a human language. Kya speaking English often begin sentences with a present participle or a phrase built around one. Wishing he could spend more time with human writers, the kya writer Gyez says, “Writing in the same genre, I might pick up some new ideas….”
Such devices must be used with care. I once tried to tell a story about members of a species with three sexes and well-differentiated sex roles in their society. It seemed obvious to me that each sex needed to have its own set of pronouns, so I used he/him and she/ her for two sexes and le/lim for the third. Unfortunately, most people got so hung up on the third pronoun that they couldn't read the story until I grudgingly changed it to use a single English pronoun for the two least dissimilar alien sexes. Pronouns seem to represent a deeper level of programming than nouns or verbs, and it's harder to get people to accept a change at that level of their own language (a fact further supported by the observed difficulty of getting a gender-unspecified pronoun generally accepted into English). Allison Tellure seems to have got away with it in “Green-Eyed Lady, Laughing Lady,” but only in a limited way and for the duration of a short story.
As Orson Scott Card has pointed out, you also have to be extra careful with metaphors in science fiction, because they might be taken and/or meant literally. “He cast his eyes toward the ceiling” means quite different things when you're talking about ordinary humans and when you're talking about someone whose eyes are detachable remote sensors with flight capability!
The most general advice I can give is that there is no absolutely general advice. I could spend as many pages on this as I liked, and still could not give you a detailed, exhaustive “how-to.” The very essence of science fiction is that you'll be creating situations that no one has had to deal with before—and then inventing ways to deal with them. In “Petals of Rose,” Marc Stiegler's human characters had to cooperate with beings who lived so fast and intensely that contact with them was dazzling and exhausting. The story contains an extraordinary number of characters for its length, some of whom might live their entire lives and die in a page or two—yet the author had to make the reader know and care about each one in that brief time.
You may never have to deal with that problem, but you may create one just as challenging. Each case is unique and must be handled in the way best suited to it, even if that way has to be invented for the occasion. My hope in this chapter is to give you a better idea of what to watch for as you read other authors' work, to gain a feel for how they solved their problems that will in turn help you solve yours.
