---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0016.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["science", "story", "one", "could", "new", "alien", "way", "speed", "planet", "fiction", "would", "based", "beyond", "still", "example", "different", "relativistic", "possible", "theory", "curve", "possibility", "might", "time", "dragon", "work"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0016html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 11
Farther Out
Life Not As We Know It
Most of this book has dealt with creating and writing about aliens and alien societies based more or less closely on known science, and in particular on ones that are at least enough like us to have developed on planets. That covers a vast range of possibilities, but not as broad a range as science fiction, as a whole, should explore. In this final chapter, let's look at some ways science fiction can go beyond that and still be science fiction.
BEYOND PLANETS AND CHEMISTRY
Most of what we have considered so far has implicitly assumed that the life-forms in question evolved on planets in more or less circular orbits around single main-sequence stars and were based on some sort of carbon-based chemistry. In other words, both they and their worlds were at some fundamental level at least recognizably similar to us and ours. That still allowed for plenty of variation. For example, their sun might be younger and bluer or older and redder than ours; their planet might have more or less axial tilt and weaker or stronger gravity; they might breathe hydrogen to reduce carbon compounds instead of oxygen to oxidize them. But at least they had a sun and seasons and gravity, and they got the energy to keep themselves alive by doing some kind of chemistry on carbon compounds. Creating worlds and aliens within those broad parameters is a relatively straightforward matter of following the guidelines laid down in chapters three through five.
I've hinted from time to time at the possibility of environments and life-forms much more fundamentally different from us. A first step in that direction is the planetary system which is more elaborate than a group of planets in essentially independent orbits around a single star, such as the contact binary system in Jerry Oltion and Lee Goodloe's “Contact.”
A more extreme example is Dr. Robert L. Forward's Rocheworld. Rocheworld is a “planet” of the nearby red dwarf Barnard's Star, but its structure is very different from what we usually understand by “planet.” It consists of two smallish planetoids so close together that tidal forces have distorted them into egg-like shapes and locked them into synchronous rotation, the same sides constantly facing each other. Their solid surfaces don't quite touch, but their closest parts are only eighty kilometers apart and they share an atmosphere of methane, ammonia and water vapor. One is “high and dry"; the other has captured all the system's liquid water and formed an ocean of ammonia and water that rises in a steep liquid “mountain” one hundred fifty kilometers high. That ocean is home to a distinctly alien intelligence.
Rocheworld's life is chemical-based, and the two-components-with-one-atmosphere can be considered a planet, of sorts—but it's so different from any “normal” planet that its details are by no means a simple or obvious variation on a standard theme. Figuring out how close they can be without completely destroying each other, and how the atmosphere and water would be distributed, required extensive original calculations. Forward, a highly skilled and imaginative physicist as well as a writer, could do that. If you want to write about something comparably unusual and original, you'll need to be prepared either to do the calculations yourself, or to find someone able and willing to do them for you. For an astronomical configuration so far from the ordinary and familiar, mere guesses are likely to be wildly wrong.
Dragon's Egg, also by Dr. Forward, is even more exotic, literally going beyond both planets and chemistry. The intelligent Cheela live on the surface of a neutron star, with half the mass of the sun, a diameter of only twenty kilometers, a surface gravity sixty-seven billion times that of Earth, and a magnetic field nearly a trillion times as strong (which has a dominant influence on how everything works there). Matter that dense doesn't even exist as atoms, so the very concept of “chemistry” does not apply. The majority of it consists of neutrons formed by “squashing the electrons into the protons"; the physical state of this “neutronium” is different at different depths, and other elementary particles occur in much smaller quantities. Chemistry involves electromagnetic interactions of the electron clouds, which are the outer parts of atoms; the most nearly analogous interactions on Dragon's Egg involve the much stronger nuclear forces.
Dragon's Egg has a fully developed ecosystem, in which the Cheela are the dominant animal. They have about the same mass and complexity as humans, but the stuff they are made of is so dense that they are only about five millimeters in diameter and a half millimeter high (or thick). They're built more or less like flattened amoebas because in a gravitational field that strong, you cannot risk falling. As a consequence of general relativistic effects in the intense gravity, time on Dragon's Egg is greatly accelerated compared to ours. In the novel, first (remote) human contact with the Cheela occurs when they are still savages, but six (Earth) years later they have developed beyond humans.
None of these details, which I can barely hint at here, was chosen on a mere whim. They are all interrelated, determined by the starting assumptions and the same laws of physics that apply everywhere—but applied in a highly unfamiliar context. Forward described some of the thinking that went into it in his article “A Taste of Dragon's Egg,” explaining how the properties of the world and its inhabitants were determined and how they managed to interact with humans. Still more detail can be found in the novel itself.
One of the things that makes Dragon's Egg special is that the author worked the background out with as much rigor and detail as possible, given the present state of physical knowledge. Conceivably someone else might have attempted a story on the same theme without such rigor, and many readers would have been none the wiser. But some would have noticed, and the story would likely have been so full of error as to be more fantasy than science fiction.
There are, of course, successful stories based on less rigorous speculation about extremely exotic life-forms. In many cases this can be justified on the grounds that a possibility can be glimpsed in a general way, but less detailed theory is available to predict exactly how it might work out. Timothy Zahn concocted a deep-space ecosystem in his “space horse” stories. “Artificial life” in “cyberspace” can be as diverse as Joseph H. Delaney and Marc Stiegler's Valentino (an intelligent, self-aware and highly personable computer program) and the more profoundly alien entities suggested in Mark Lesney's article. Still other possibilities include the enormous intelligent nebula in Fred Hoyle's The Black Cloud, the silicon-based planetary intelligence in Joseph Green's Conscience Interplanetary, and the organized electromagnetic waves that forced humans to give up electricity in Fredric Brown's “The Waveries.”
In general, the further your speculations go from the kinds of science found in standard books and software packages, the more you must be prepared to take one of two courses: Research or obfuscate. Scientific journals will often suggest such ideas and give you enough detail to pursue their implications, though doing that may still require you to do esoteric calculations of your own. This is surely to be preferred if you're up to it, since it gives an added layer of resonance and “critic-proofing” to your story. If you're unable or unwilling to do that, you may still be able to tell such a story well enough to satisfy at least some readers by being artfully vague, giving as few numerical details as possible to minimize opportunity for readers to catch you in errors. This is still risky, though. If the science you're trying to use is reasonably well established and you don't understand it, your imaginings may be not only quantitatively, but qualitatively—and perhaps grossly—wrong.
BEYOND KNOWN SCIENCE
As some of the last examples may suggest, the category of stories based on far-out but real science merges gradually into another: stories based in part on new, or invented, science. Please note that this is not automatically the same as wrong science. Faster-than-light travel in which an object can be accelerated to any desired speed simply by giving it the amount of kinetic energy calculated from Newton's equations (the dotted line in figure 11-1) is wrong science. We know it doesn't work that way because even at speeds well below that of light, we have experimental data showing that as you go faster and faster, you need more and more energy to produce even a little additional speed, as described by Einstein's theory of relativity (the solid line in figure 11-1). The fact that the curve becomes ever steeper as the speed approaches that of light, never quite reaching it, is commonly taken as proof that material objects can never reach or exceed the speed of light.
However, there's an important assumption hidden in that proof. It assumes that the relativistic equation defining the solid curve in figure 11-1, based on experimental data for objects up to a point very near the speed of light, continues to hold for all objects at all speeds. But we have no data beyond that point, and at some point beyond it the curve could go off in some quite unexpected direction. It could, for example, suddenly turn down, cross the apparent asymptote (limit) v = c, and descend sharply on the other side, as in the dashed curve in figure 11-1. This would have many profound implications, the most important of which is that you could achieve very high FTL speeds with relatively little energy, if you could find a way to jump from one side of the “kinetic barrier” to the other. An analogy with quantum mechanics (a phenomenon called “tunneling”) qualitatively suggests a way that could conceivably happen, so I have felt no compunction about using variations on this type of FTL in several stories (including The Sins of the Fathers and Lifeboat Earth).
FIGURE 11 -1 Three versions of the kinetic energy of an object as a function of speed: classical, relativistic and one of many possible extrapolations. Science invented for science fiction must agree with established science in regions confirmed by experiment.
Present knowledge provides no reason to believe that the world will turn out to work that way—but neither does it provide any rigorous proof that it can't. I use a “negative impossibility” criterion—anything that can't be rigorously proved impossible with present knowledge is fair game for science fiction.
That does not mean you can ignore present knowledge. The general rule you must keep in mind is what physicists sometimes call the correspondence principle: Any new theory must give the same answers as the old in regions of experience where the old theory has been confirmed by experiment. Thus, for example, in figure 11-1, the dotted classical curve is indistinguishable from the solid relativistic curve for speeds well below c, and the relativistic curve is indistinguishable from the science-fictional one up to some speed very slightly below c.
How likely is it that future research will turn up such surprises? We have no way of knowing—but we do know that it has happened repeatedly in the past. We have no reason to assume we've had our last major surprises. Relativity and quantum mechanics are two examples of major revisions in physics in this century alone; plate tectonics and the genetic code of DNA are comparable examples from geology and biology.
Remember the correspondence principle—Einstein didn't prove Newton wrong, but merely too limited. Classical physics is a special case of relativistic physics. However, a radically new theory is likely to be understood in terms of a radically new model of how the universe is built. The relativistic picture of the universe is quite different from the classical, and if the dashed curve of figure 11-1 turned out to be right, we would probably need a new model, as different from the current relativistic one as that is from the classical.
This could happen in different ways. In Jeffery D. Kooistra's “Sunshine, Genius, and Rust” and “Young Again,” a brilliant theoretical physicist named Dykstra constructs a new theory with testable implications that greatly extend the scope of practical physics. In my Lifeboat Earth series, practice came first. Experimentalists stumbled onto ways of doing things that couldn't be predicted by old theories, and the struggle of theorists to formulate a new model to explain them became part of the story background.
Many science-fictional speculations can be thought of as belonging to one of two broad categories. Extrapolation means new consequences of well-established science, such as a new way of getting a payload to orbit cheaply or a possible ecosystem based on a known set of chemical reactions working together in a way no one has thought of before. Innovation means postulating a brand new scientific principle or kind of science, such as Dykstra physics or the quasimaterials in my Newton and the Quasi-Apple. Since past science and technology have involved both kinds of advances, and will probably continue to do so in the future, science fiction should include both as well. Not necessarily in the same story; but for imagining how the future might be, it is important to imagine both new consequences of what we already know, and what sorts of surprises we might have to deal with.
One special case, not clearly either extrapolation or innovation, is the broad area of parapsychological (“psi”) phenomena such as telepathy, telekinesis and clairvoyance. Present theory provides little or no basis for understanding them, and their very existence or possibility is controversial. Some scientists think there is enough anecdotal and experimental evidence for their existence to warrant, at least, serious research. Others dismiss them as pure folklore, reject the laboratory results obtained so far, and deny that there's anything there to study.
For science-fictional purposes, I'd say psi effects can meet my “negative impossibility” test and be used legitimately in science fiction, provided that you work out a consistent set of assumptions about how they operate, and don't contradict scientific knowledge that is firmly established. An effective science-fictional use of psi abilities by aliens can be found in the dragons in Anne McCaffrey's Dragonflight. However, I should caution you that the psi area was heavily overworked in past years. Readers now tend to be a bit tired of it and resistant to new variations on the theme—unless you can be very original and convincing.
CONCLUSION
Early in this book I mentioned that there's something extra special about a story that's not only fantastic but possible. In general, a reader will be more easily convinced of a story's possibility if it's based on something already known than if it depends on something that could be but has not yet shown any evidence of itself. So if you can achieve what you need with known science, it's usually best to do so. There will be times when that isn't possible, and you have to resort to invented science. In The Sins of the Fathers, I didn't have to invent galactic core explosions; they'd been observed many times, and a possible mechanism for them had been suggested that I could use in my story. However, faster-than-light travel was the only way we could have either advance knowledge or any chance of escape—so I had to use it. To use it effectively, I had to decide on a specific model for it, and work within the logical implications of that model—which, as it happened, suggested important parts of the story.
Sometimes you really need new science, and a science fiction that never used any would be incomplete and wrong. But introduce it only when you've found no more conservative way to do what you want—and bear in mind that even the conservative possibilities are more than you think. I've thrown out a number of free story ideas throughout this book, and it's easy to think of more. For example, in chapter five, I described two general types of “intelligence"; can you imagine a third? What would a burrowing civilization be like—say, if prairie dogs inherited the Earth? You've undoubtedly had the experience of being in a stimulating conversation and hearing something that suggested three other lines you'd like to pursue. Being human, you had to pick one; can you imagine a kind of alien that wouldn't have to pick, but could carry on “branching conversations"?
Writing about aliens can be fun, rewarding and challenging. Perhaps the biggest challenge is to make your aliens really alien yet also “real” and believable. A good starting point for anyone wanting to do that is to learn all you can about what exists on this planet, be it geology or biology or culture or language—and then go beyond it. That will do at least two things for you. It will stretch your mental horizons, perhaps far enough to ensure that your novelties aren't hopelessly unimaginative even compared to present reality. And it will very likely suggest many ideas that could lead to good stories.
Take one or more of those ideas and pursue their implications as far as you can, using real science insofar as possible and invented science when you must. Get to know your aliens and their world, watch what they do, and then tell their story. With a little luck and a respectable amount of work, you may come up with something not only alien, but believable and memorable.
