---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0011.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["human", "specie", "might", "culture", "one", "many", "may", "would", "even", "science", "likely", "animal", "alien", "much", "time", "way", "different", "thing", "could", "new", "like", "people", "make", "quite", "world"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0011html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 6
Creating Alien Societies
Show me a being that thinks as well as a man,” John W. Campbell told writers, “but not like a man.” To do that, you must have a realistic idea of what it means to think like a man (or, in today's preferred language, a human). Chances are that your idea of the answer is far too narrow. Since most people spend the vast majority of their lives in a single culture, they tend to assume, consciously or subconsciously, that that culture's ways are equivalent to “human nature.”
In fact, human ways cover a much broader range of possibilities than the few selected by any one society; and any individual's personal thinking and habits are even more influenced than he or she probably realizes by the culture in which he lives. About the closest I've come to identifying a genuine “universal” of human nature is this: Most people in any culture consider their culture's ways “just normal,” and any others that differ from them “strange” and probably inferior (savage, barbaric, pagan, etc.).
We often hear, and most people in the culture I grew up in seem quite willing to accept, that “Humankind is by nature warlike.” Yet in Patterns of Culture, anthropologist Ruth Benedict observed, “Only our familiarity with war makes it intelligible that a state of warfare should alternate with a state of peace in one tribe's dealings with another. The idea is quite common over the world, of course. But on the one hand it is impossible for certain peoples [such as the Yanomamö]  to conceive the possibility of a state of peace, which in their notion would be equivalent to admitting enemy tribes to the category of human beings, which by definition they are not even though the excluded tribe may be of their own race and culture. On the other hand, it may be just as impossible for a people [such as the Inuit] to conceive of the possibility of a state of war.”
That is but one example of how differently peoples can see the world and their role in it. A science fiction writer who hopes to create societies that are truly alien, yet believable, would be well advised to start by studying cultural anthropology, through books such as Benedict's and more recent studies in the same area. One of the commonest faults with science-fictional aliens is that they are little more than “humans in funny suits.” Or, more precisely, “humans-of-the-author's-own-place-and-period in funny suits": Many real human cultures are far more alien than many fictional aliens. To avoid that pitfall, you must learn something about the range of human cultural possibilities—partly because they will suggest story ideas, and partly to stretch your imagination beyond its usual parochial limits.
Even that is not enough. Diverse as human cultures are, they are all human. They are ways that a single species of animal has found to live in the relatively narrow range of environments on a single planet. On a different planet, with a different kind of sun or a different axial tilt or a richer or poorer supply of heavy elements, even a single species would come up with quite different solutions. Other species, with different evolutionary backgrounds, would come up with still others, some of which might evolve into different kinds of intelligence and culture. Since the cultural patterns of intelligent species must have evolved gradually from the behavior patterns of their less intelligent ancestors, you should also learn something about ethology, the science of animal behavior. Marine cephalopods, herd-dwelling herbivores, arboreal omnivores and pack-hunting carnivores will, if they develop civilizations at all, develop extremely different kinds of civilization. Learning about the kinds of social interactions such animals and others already show may give you ideas of what kinds of societies they might eventually produce.
Ethology is, of course, a huge subject. The National Geographic Society's book in the References is a good layman's introduction, and will provide more in-depth references to topics that particularly interest you.
Since we are the only species we've had a chance to observe that has developed societies of human complexity (though we've recently learned that several other species have done far more in this area than previously suspected), much of our thinking will have to be guided by existing or historic human cultures. Our basic plan will be to survey some of the elements that have developed in human cultures, and then to think about how they might develop differently—or be replaced by others—in beings with different evolutionary roots. As in the last chapter, you'll notice repeatedly how the things I've listed as separate topics are in fact inextricably intertwined.
ELEMENTS OF CULTURE:OUR PAST AND ITS IMPLICATIONS
Our species evolved from omnivorous primates in Equatorial Africa. One of the earliest known hominid species, Australopithecus afarensis, seems to date back at least four million years or so and to have held its own quite successfully for a million years or so (see Stephen Jay Gould's “Lucy on the Earth in Stasis”). According to many contemporary evolutionists (including Gould), successful species often remain pretty much unchanged for such long periods, until abrupt environmental changes, such as a shift from forest to savanna conditions or the beginning of an ice age, force them to develop new adaptations. Eventually one such burst of evolutionary activity split off several new species of Australopithecus and also the new genus Homo, to which you (I presume) and I belong.
Most of the primates already showed several features we think of as characteristically human, probably largely as a result of their arboreal origins. These include large and complex brains, long gestations to let those brains develop, long dependent childhoods to fill those brains with useful education, unspecialized and therefore adaptable bodies with “hands” on at least two limbs, and a tendency to live in groups. To these, the hominids added some tricks of their own, most notably a fully upright and bipedal posture and increasing complication of social structures. Let's look at some of these traits and their contributions to the development of human culture, as well as some others that came into play later on. (For further reading on these matters, see L. Sprague de Camp's “The Ape-Man Within Us.”)
Living In Groups
This is probably a basic prerequisite for culture. Since culture is by definition a body of knowledge and behavior patterns shared by a group, it's hard to imagine it arising in a species of solitary habits. (Science fiction writers are, of course, welcome to take that claim as a challenge!)
Relatively complex family and social structures were already well established in many kinds of primates, but probably got an extra boost when ancestral forests began thinning out to savanna. With traditional food sources scarcer than before, continued prosperity required learning to use others that were not found in trees. Mouths and digestive systems equipped to handle a wide range of foods were clearly useful for that, as was the ability to stand upright and get around easily on the ground. But perhaps most useful of all was the formation of social structures that could cooperate in defense against predators and enemies, the capturing of large food animals, and sharing such large units of food.
Since meat was not the only food source, early cultures were based on hunting and gathering, with some people doing the hunting and others the gathering. Here is a beginning of division of labor and specialization of tasks. It is probably not a beginning of distinct roles for the two sexes; that sort of thing is already found in many other species of animals. It is not surprising that the sex roles assumed by early humans were continuations and extensions of those in their ancestors. Since gathering was generally safer than hunting, and females were more indispensable than males for at least the early stages of child-rearing, it was almost inevitable that males would do most of the hunting and females most of the gathering.
Reproduction and Childhood
The behaviors associated with reproduction and that long period of dependency played central roles in how social structures developed and worked, and this has remained true throughout history. Another advantage of living in groups is that it can provide extra safety and support for dependent children, including baby-sitters and backup mothers for orphans. But the central importance of such matters also requires that social units include mechanisms for minimizing conflicts, determining who mates with whom, and ensuring that the young actually are raised and trained. Thus arose a whole elaborate system of rules and rituals. In humans, at least, such systems are largely not instinctive, so they have developed quite differently in different cultures.
However, certain broad characteristics are widespread. Most cultures have some form of marriage (though not necessarily monogamous, and varying greatly in the rights and obligations it involves). Most have rites of passage to formalize the transition from childhood to adulthood (which can range from ritualized physical torture and mutilation to high school graduations and debutante balls).
In creating new cultures for science fiction, you can imagine many ways things might develop differently. If there are more than two sexes, their roles and relationships might define themselves differently. Even with only two sexes, their roles might be quite different. Among lions, the usual family organization is a “pride” with one male, several females and their cubs—and from time to time a new male will forcibly oust the old one, and immediately slaughter all his cubs. What kind of culture might evolve from such an arrangement? Some interesting speculations along those lines can be found in Eric Vinicoff and Marcia Martin's 'The Weigher” and C.J. Cherryh's Chanur books. In “The Weigher,” for example, civilized feline females go into wilderness to have cubs; if the cubs survive long enough, they may be captured, trained in the ways of civilization, and eventually challenge their elders for job, territory and life.
Language
This is the mortar that lets generations build on the achievements of those that went before. It allows the transmission of large bodies of complex information, not only from adults to children, but from adults to other adults of their own or later—even much later—generations. Among humans it likely grew out of gestures and sound signals used for such activities as coordinating hunts and warning other group members of danger. Its role in building and sustaining culture is so centrally important, and its nature so directly pertinent to the storytelling process, that the next chapter will be devoted entirely to it.
Conflict and Cooperation
The history of humans and many other animals involves an ongoing counterpoint of competition and cooperation. Societies exist in large measure because of the benefits the members of groups can get by cooperating: sharing work and food, responsibility for child-rearing, and the good feelings they get from companionship. Yet the mere fact of many individuals living together sets the stage for conflict: competition for food, for mates, for power over other members of the group. The counterpoint can be seen in microcosm in any baboon troop, small town, high school or corporate boardroom. Societies have had to evolve mechanisms for controlling the conflicts. Typically these mechanisms have involved hierarchies or “pecking orders,” in which one individual somehow acquires general recognition as The Boss and everyone else must submit to that one's will.
Conflicts occur not only within a group, but between groups. If one nomadic tribe encountered another on a favorite hunting ground, or at an oasis with limited supplies of food and water, each might feel threatened by the other. Each group might try to drive the other off so it could keep all the goodies for itself—which, if the goodies were indeed scarce, might make evolutionary sense. It has been suggested (see L. Sprague de Camp's “The Ape-Man Within Us”) that many of our currently continuing problems of intergroup hostilities represent a genetically programmed hostility to “outsiders” that once was a survival trait but now is a liability. There is probably some truth in this, though there also seems to be some difficulty in reconciling it with Ruth Benedict's observations on the Inuit and war.
In any case, our history has been largely shaped by the tension between the pulls toward cooperation and conflict, both within and between groups. Many of the benefits of civilization have resulted from successes in cooperation within groups, and sometimes between them—though the latter, not surprisingly, are much harder to achieve.
In their rawest forms, conflicts take the form of bludgeoning and bloodshed: mayhem and murder at the individual level, warfare at the tribal or larger level. There are clear advantages in finding less bloody ways to resolve them, so many animals have found ways to do so. Males of many animal species fight for mating rights, but in quite a few of them (such as bighorn sheep) the combats have become so ritualized that they are unlikely to end in death. The more civilized humans get, the more they tend to ritualize their battles. It's debatable how far beyond ritualization we can go. Some believe the tendency toward combativeness is built-in and outlets will always have to be found for it. Others suspect it's largely a cultural artifact and can (with great difficulty) be trained away. Whatever its actual origin and nature, it seems that, at least now and in many human cultures, such a tendency does exist, and such activities as organized sports exist partly as a relatively harmless outlet for that kind of energy.
The other view of sports is that it is simply an outgrowth of play. Playfulness—an urge for young animals to experiment with their environment and each other and to imitate the behavior of the adults around them—is a vital part of training to be adults in most animals of appreciable intelligence. Its value is such that this is likely to be true of species on other planets, too; and survival of parts of it into adulthood may well lead to things like our culture's fascination with sports. On the other hand, it may also be that many aliens would be astonished and perplexed by the fact that so many of us are so enthralled by the antics of a handful of grown-up strangers playing with a little sphere. Why, they might well wonder, should more of our newspapers be devoted to that, of all things, than to any other single subject?
Or they might have their own sports, but of quite different character reflecting their different origins. The tension between conflict and cooperation probably exists in most intelligent species, but their relative importance and the way they're handled may vary considerably. Many of us are at least casually familiar with power struggles and dominance hierarchies in such species as baboons. Less well known is the existence of species with lots of cooperation and very little conflict (see Natalie Angier's article on cotton-top tamarins). In his story, 'Touchdown, Touchdown, Rah, Rah, Rah!,” W.R. Thompson shows how a species whose history emphasized cooperation more than conflict might develop a sport quite different from any of ours.
Bagdrag is a ritualized survival of a preagricultural time when herds, inherently cooperative entities, sometimes had to compete with other herds for food. Three teams drag a heavy bag around on a hexagonal field, each side of which is a goal line. Each team has a home goal, and the line connecting two of those is a shared goal for those two teams. Any team can get one point by dragging the bag across its home goal, but if two teams cooperate to drag it across their shared goal, each gets two points—and players prefer a tie to a game with a clear winner and a clear loser.
Agriculture, Villages and Cities
The earliest hominids were nomadic; they went where the action was, in terms of available food and water. Somewhere along the line, some of them made a crucial decision: to settle down and become villagers and farmers, forcing food to grow where they were instead of constantly having to go where it was. As told in J. Bronowski's The Ascent of Man (chapter two), the real revolution took not only that decision, but also a fortuitous biological accident. It is one thing to decide you're tired of traveling and will settle down and live on what you find around you; it is another to find that you can actually do that in a style to which you'd like to become accustomed. Most wild plants just aren't that bountiful.
In the case of Old World humans, the lucky accident was wheat. Its wild form was just another grass, producing seeds that were edible, but requiring considerable effort to gather enough to be very nutritious. But two hybridizations and a mutation led to a new form producing plump, nutritious seeds, yet incapable of distributing them by natural means as its ancestors had done. The combination gave humans a strong incentive to settle down and devote themselves to cultivating the new wheat, seeing that some of the seeds got back into the ground and using some as a reliable “staff of life” for themselves. Such early agriculture actually seems to have been more labor-intensive than the life of hunter-gatherers—but more reliable.
And it meant the beginning of cities. Not large cities, at first, but places where sizable numbers of people gathered to dwell permanently in one place, living off the crops grown there. In surrounding nomads, subject to the uncertainties of natural food sources, permanent settlements with controlled, dependable food sources of their own were bound to evoke covetousness. So farming villages had to fortify and defend what they had….
And so on.
How unlikely were the biological accidents that led to this revolution in human life? Perhaps not terribly; they, or something enough like them, seem to have occurred independently at several times and places on Earth. Might there be worlds on which they didn't happen? If so, civilization might be rarer than we'd guess; and human explorers might find many worlds with intelligent beings stuck at what we would consider “early” stages of development.
In places where the agricultural revolution does happen, cities are likely to grow bigger and bigger, as they've done on Earth. But as a writer creating such places, you must never forget how they originated and how they work. A common mistake in science fiction is to depict huge, highly advanced civilizations without supplying, either explicitly or implicitly, the physical infrastructure that could make them work. In our own civilization, many cities are so big and so isolated from the farms that many of their residents have no real conception of where food comes from. You must not fall into that trap; you must never forget that, even if they're out of sight, the farms (or something that serves the same purpose) must be there. If the places where food is produced are distant, there must be a transportation system for getting produce—and other raw materials—to the users. And the more users there are, the more essential it becomes that there be means (which may have to be large and elaborate) for disposing of their wastes.
Domestic Animals
Closely related to the agricultural revolution, and of comparable importance in the development of human civilization, was the domestication of animals. A wide variety of animals, from dogs and cats to tarantulas, have been kept as pets; but domestication means more than that. In the strict sense it means not just taming and keeping animals, but selectively breeding them (and thereby modifying them from their wild ancestral forms) to serve human purposes. And, as Jared Diamond points out in his article “Zebras and the Anna Karenina Principle,” that has implications that are far more profound and wide-reaching than you might expect.
It's perhaps obvious that big domestic animals are highly valuable to societies that have them. They serve as reliable sources of high-energy, high-protein food. Their body coverings provide insulating material for clothing and shelter. Their excrement can also serve as a building material, and as fuel. As fertilizer, it improves the cultivation of crops. The animals themselves made possible a technological leap in agriculture by serving as draught animals to pull plows and other implements in the field, and wagons to carry produce to distant markets. These advantages allowed human populations to grow larger and denser and societies more complex, with some people freed from agriculture and able to devote their time to other specialties such as crafts and writing. Thus domestic animals directly contributed to many aspects of civilization. But their influence goes even further than that.
Much of human history is a record of who conquered and subjugated whom. How different might human history have been if Africans and Amerindians invaded and colonized Europe before Europeans got to Africa and the Americas? The fact that history's major empire-builders came from Europe and Asia is directly attributable to the fact that they had domestic animals like horses that gave them a powerful advantage over peoples who didn't have them. Eurasians have sometimes flattered themselves that this historical accident somehow demonstrates their innate superiority, but Jared Diamond makes a convincing case that it was a historical accident. Eurasians had a decisive edge simply because they had several domesticable animals available and other peoples didn't. Not all animals lend themselves to domestication. Some grow too slowly to be economically worth raising; some can't be fed economically; some don't breed well in captivity or have dispositions or social structures that make it impractical to keep or raise them. Only a handful of species on Earth don't have at least one of these disadvantages, and it just happens that almost all of those are native only to Eurasia.
There was a time when the Americas also had several animals that could have been domesticated, but they were hunted to extinction when humans came to the New World; most were gone by 11,000 years ago. Why this happened in America but not Eurasia provides yet another example of the importance of historical accident and timing. In Eurasia, the process of domestication began before humans had the ability to hunt most animals to extinction; so humans, animals and their domestic relationships all developed together. By the time humans came to America, they were too good at hunting for their own good, and the animals they encountered had had no opportunity to develop a healthy fear of them.
That bit of prehistory neatly disposes of the popular myth that primitive peoples in general or Amerindians in particular lived in harmony with nature and had little impact on their environment. It also suggests one of several speculations about how things might have developed differently, any of which might provide good material for science fiction. What if humans had come to the New World much earlier, so that their relationships with local animals could develop as they did in Eurasia? What if the land bridge they came over was destroyed shortly after their arrival, so that human cultures with domestic animals could develop independently here and there for several years? Harry Turtledove's A Different Flesh shows an alternate history based on a variant of this idea. (Homo erectus, a slightly more primitive hominid, crossed to the Americas, but Homo sapiens didn't. So the first English colonists found the land occupied not by “Indians” but by Homo erectus who had not been quite clever enough to exterminate things like mammoths and sabertooths.)
We now have only one species of hominid on Earth, but in the early millions of years there were several. Sometimes two or more existed at the same time; recent evidence suggests that sometimes two or more tool-using species were neighbors. Might one have treated the other as domestic animals—and if so, what effect would that have on both? Even after we were down to one species, humans often enslaved other humans, sometimes justifying the practice by claiming that the enslaved group were “not really human.” We know better now—but what might happen in a situation where the same world held two species, one of which really was conspicuously less intelligent than the other, yet conspicuously more so than most other species?
The Aztecs had the wheel, but it apparently never occurred to them to use it for anything except toys. What if they'd had horses, or something like horses, much earlier in their history? Might they then have made the leap to wagons and beyond? That question leads us to …
Other Technologies
Having hands developed for tree life opened the possibility of using tools. Acquiring the habit of walking upright left one pair of hands free to do so much of the time. (And made the other pair unnecessary; human feet have now adapted to be more useful for walking than grasping, leaving us the only primates without prehensile toes.) Couple those physical abilities with long childhoods and a playful tendency to experiment, and it was probably inevitable that early primates would discover that sticks and rocks could be used to facilitate food-gathering. Later they found that rocks could be used to modify other rocks into still more effective shapes. This is not, by the way, to suggest that such skills are “primitive.” Chipping flint takes a good deal of skill, and few of us today could do it because we've concentrated our learning on other skills.
Such activities snowballed, slowly at first, but at a rate that increased inexorably (and is still doing so). Every time a member of a clever species learns to do something new, and teaches the method to others, it becomes increasingly likely that somebody will see still other new applications of an old technique, or new ways to combine old techniques into a new one. Thus paleolithic humans learned to use rocks as tools (e.g., weapons and digging implements) and neolithic humans used them to make better tools for a wide range of purposes (e.g., hunting, fishing, carrying liquids and making clothing and shelter).
Clothing and shelter were of minimal importance in the times and places where the first hominids evolved, but became increasingly necessary as they expanded into regions of harsher climate—or regions of harsher climate came to them. Perhaps the latter came first, when the glaciers spread toward the equator. Worsening climate forced people to develop protection against the cold—but once they knew how to do it, they could move into regions their ancestors would have considered uninhabitable.
A particularly powerful ally in coping with inclement weather was fire. Primitive hominids must have encountered it in nature, as a result of lightning; learning to keep a fire going and to start one at will opened up many new possibilities. It could keep a shelter more comfortable under even more conditions. It could help keep pesky animals away. By cooking food, it could enhance flavor and variety. It made it possible to refine and work metals, producing greatly improved tools and ornaments of copper, gold and silver, later alloys of copper, and eventually iron. I hardly need to emphasize how important these things have been to our civilizations' development. Natives of a world on which heavier elements are quite scarce might never get beyond a stone age, for lack of materials (see Jack Vance's Big Planet). But might they compensate by learning to do more than we have with lighter elements? Conceivable, but doubtful. In this century we've been doing things with light elements that our ancestors could not have imagined, but it's not clear that we could have done them without first having long experience with the easier things that can be done with metals. On the other hand, if your light-element planet orbits a late-class star, the inhabitants may have a lot of time to learn….
The use of clothing and shelter probably originated as a necessity for coping with bad weather. Both have grown greatly in sophistication, both as technologies and as arts. The increasing tendency of large numbers of people to live in compact areas also forced the development of improved sanitation methods such as indoor plumbing and sewers, though these were quite late in coming to most areas. Until quite recently, largely because of poor sanitation and ignorance of how diseases are transmitted, life expectancies were much lower than they are now in developed areas. Attempts to cure disease probably led quite early to experimentation with plants, some of which proved to have medicinal value. Such experiments gradually evolved into an increasingly sophisticated bag of medical tricks.
Religions and Sciences
Attempts to cure disease, and to understand and deal with such traumatic and uncontrollable events as birth and death and storm and famine, probably also contributed to the development of religion. In primitive societies, a person who had acquired some knowledge of medical practices that worked—whether through experience or being taught “the secrets” by earlier practitioners—would be in a position to wield considerable power. To reinforce and retain that power, such people might be tempted to fortify it with an imposing array of rituals to impress the uninitiated and make sure they took the whole business seriously. Enough humans seem fond of ritual that the strategy would often work and allow the development of a firmly entrenched priesthood.
The origins of the oldest religions are lost in prehistory. The ones of which we have more or less detailed records came much later and were influenced to varying extents by those that went before. So it's difficult to say whether the earliest religions were more creations of particularly influential individuals, or outgrowths of shared folklore. It seems fairly safe to say, though, that most religions include rituals related to a belief in one or more powers higher than human, stories to explain the origins of world and life, and teachings aimed at inculcating and perpetuating a moral code.
Religion in some form has existed in most, if not all, human cultures. Its exact shape has varied greatly, as has the degree of its influence on the surrounding culture. A writer who wants to create an original religion for an alien culture would be well advised to do some reading on human religions. However, he or she would also be well advised to ask questions that go beyond merely comparing human religions and trying to add another to the catalog.
For instance, would aliens necessarily have religions at all? There seems to be something in the built-in programming of humans that impels them to seek answers to the kinds of questions that religions ask, and to create or willingly accept the kinds of answers that religions give. It may be too much to assume that all intelligent species have the same kind of impulses. Some, for example, might have intense interest and curiosity about the details of everyday life, yet either have no interest in the Big Questions or consider the Big Answers too far beyond comprehension to waste time on.
Often, in science fiction, a religion and the culture of which it is a part will be designed to serve specific needs of the story. In “Unhu-man Sacrifice,” Katherine MacLean needed to show a culture with a ritual (hanging youths upside down for a week or so right before adulthood) that was obviously stupid and barbaric to human eyes, yet absolutely indispensable to the race that practiced it (it was an essential part of their life cycle). In Newton and the Quasi-Apple, I had to put an alien race's analog of a key scientist from our own history (rather like a bit of Galileo and Newton rolled into one) into conflict with a theocracy like the one Galileo faced—but not too much like it.
As the last example illustrates, science and religion have many of the same concerns—and don't always see eye to eye about them, even though some prominent scientists have been churchmen. Religion, though, has developed far more often in human history than science. Why is that?
First, you must understand that science and technology are not the same. Technology began when the first hominids used rocks or sticks to change the shape of other rocks or sticks. Learning to use fire and make spears and arrows and canoes were large technological advances. That sort of thing can be done without science—that is, without an analytical understanding of the underlying principles. A great deal can be accomplished simply by tinkering and building on the tinkering of your forebears, experimentally finding things that work and using them, regardless of whether you understand why they work.
But there are limits. Poul Anderson, in his speculations on the nature and origin of science in chapter eight of Is There Life on Other Worlds?, doubts that it's possible for such purely pragmatic craftsmanship to produce a sophisticated ship or an airplane. I'm not sure I agree that it's impossible, but it would at the very least be a much slower process, likely taking more time than most species have.
Science adds an extra element that helps: theory. Scientists observe, both personally and through the accumulated observations of others. They attempt to formulate systems of rules that precisely describe the observations made so far and can be used to predict things that haven't been observed yet. They then do experiments to test those predictions. If the experimental results agree with the predictions, they provide support for the theory—additional reason to believe that it is, if not an exact description of the real world, at least a good and useful model. By “useful” I mean, among other things, that it can be used to design things that are expensive to build—things like bridges and airliners—and be reasonably sure they will work.
So there is a connection between science and technology. Science makes possible kinds of technology that would be difficult to imagine, much less execute, without it. But Anderson suspects, and I suspect he's right, that its development is far from inevitable. (My Newton and the Quasi-Apple shows how a fundamental breakthrough crucial to a species' development of science could be derailed by untimely exposure to a bit of advanced technology that doesn't seem to fit the theory. What if Newton had seen an “apple” [in this case an artificial construct of advanced physics called “qua-simaterial”] that didn't follow the law of gravity?) Scientific method seems to have originated only once among humans, and the fact that it did seems to have depended on several social conditions coming together in a somewhat improbable combination. It happened in the Renaissance, and required the fusion of several ideas or attitudes that had all existed before, but never all at once, including the Hellenistic interest in mathematics and logic, the medieval Judeo-Christian emphasis on trying to establish rigorously which theory was right, and the emphasis on trade and handicraft during the Dark Ages.
One interesting question raised by Anderson concerns the relationship between the “hard” or physical sciences (such as physics, chemistry and astronomy) and the “soft” or “human” sciences (such as psychology, sociology and economics). We can easily imagine a world on which the physical sciences have not progressed very far, but that may not imply anything about the state of the “soft” sciences. They could, in fact, be better developed there than here. Conceivably, the rapid progress of the physical sciences on Earth has interfered with the growth of the human sciences, partly by attracting talented researchers away from them and partly by creating a perceived compulsion to use the methodology of the physical sciences in an area where something else might be more appropriate and effective.
Arts
Still another major area of intellectual activity that has occupied our kind since its very early days is that group of pursuits called “the arts.” Wall paintings in ancient cave dwellings depict the dwellers' lives and world with considerable sophistication, and artifacts that are clearly musical instruments leave little doubt that they had discovered the charms of patterned sound. Other species will likely have developed similar pursuits—but how similar? It has been suggested that one of the few things that might be worth carrying in interstellar commerce would be arts and crafts. Would different species be able to understand each other's artistic productions enough to make it worthwhile?
My guess is: yes and no. You don't need to look beyond our own species to see that there can be considerable gulfs between one culture's ideas of beauty, or what a set of symbols represents, and another. The glib proverb notwithstanding, music is not a universal language. To a typical American, the popular music of Japan or Bulgaria is likely to sound quite strange, and not at all likely to evoke in him or her the same things it evokes in a Japanese or Bulgarian who grew up with it. (Of course, it works the other way, too!) Yet it is likely to evoke something, if only a vague impression of exoticness. Even though music does not communicate perfectly across cultural borders, it often communicates far more than the spoken languages of the same cultures. And there are sound physical reasons for that.
Part of it is that our nervous systems are all wired similarly—which will not be true of us and most alien species. But another part goes even deeper: The relationships of sound that human music incorporates tend to be ones that have special significance in a purely physical sense. It's no coincidence, for example, that the sequence of notes that a European or American harmony student knows as a well-voiced major chord is precisely the set of natural frequencies produced by many common natural vibrating systems, such as air columns or strings. Certain relationships of frequencies occur naturally so often that beings who can distinguish frequencies at all will almost inevitably home in on them and use some of them in their music. The wishful thinking of atonalists notwithstanding, there is something special about the relationships on which scales and harmony are based.
Similar arguments could be made for visual arts. Representational drawing is a fairly simple form of mapping reality, and likely to occur in forms at least approximately recognizable to many intelligences that feel the urge to record their surroundings.
Still, which elements of their surroundings they choose to concentrate on, and how they choose to map them or weave them into song, can vary considerably. Humans are all built to recognize the specialness of an octave or a fifth, but European music is practically unique in the importance it places on harmony. Other cultures are likely to use scales, such as the pentatonic one that occurs independently in many parts of the world, that are based in a different way on the same physically special relationships; but they are also likely to place more emphasis on other aspects of music, such as melody or rhythm.
And any culture's arts are likely to evolve quite far from their physically simple origins. In music, for example, people in this part of the world have expanded their palettes to include chromatic scales and the complex harmonies of Stravinsky or modern jazz, while others elsewhere use intervals even smaller than those in our chromatic scales. In painting and sculpture, some later practitioners have moved away from straightforward representation to cubism and surrealism. Artists of other species, even if their starting points were similar to ours, are likely to experiment in still other directions.
And, of course, some species may have such different senses or nervous programming that they will have whole areas of art with no close counterparts among us. A species that does not distinguish colors or pitches would be unable to perceive many of the most important features of our art; but may make up for it by creating artistic patterns with things that we can't perceive, like the polarization of light, subtle nuances of scent or electromagnetic field pat- terns. Dolphins use sound, but they use it over such a wide range of frequencies that we can't hear much of it. Your aliens' art may be only incidental to your story, but if you want it to be more than that, and interesting in its own right, keep always in mind that it would have developed to please and move them, not us.
Trade, Money and Credit
If neighboring cultures discover that each of them has natural resources or skills that the other lacks, both can benefit by exchanging what they have too much of for what they have too little of. Such a situation may arise for the obvious geographical reasons: You live where there is plenty of water, I live where there is plenty of salt. Or it may result from a difference of lifestyles. Jacob Bronowski describes the example of the Bakhtiari, nomadic herders who roam parts of Iran with flocks of sheep and goats—and little else. Having to carry all their possessions, they do not carry nonessentials or things that they need only rarely. They cannot afford the time or carry the equipment to make things like metal pots, so they barter for them with settled peoples who do make them.
Barter is the most basic form of trade: a simple exchange of different kinds of goods or services. Money has proved such a useful invention that most cultures have adopted some form of it. A compact medium of exchange can both simplify transactions and increase flexibility. If we agree that your ton of coal is worth my camel, we could meet somewhere and trade, but that requires physically getting both to the meeting point and then back to their new homes. If we agree that each is worth a thousand dollars and I don't really need the coal right away and can't store that much at a time, I can sell you my camel now, pocket the thousand dollars, and buy as much coal as I need, when I need it. Such a system will inevitably generate some kind of banking system, so I can even loan a third party some of the thousand dollars and let it earn interest while I wait for coal-burning season.
At present we're moving toward a system that takes the money system a step further: The money doesn't even have to be a physical object, but can be numbers processed by computers reflecting who owes and can afford what. That, too, seems likely in species that develop computers and use them as widely as we do—but it's not inevitable.
Whatever the method or medium of exchange, some form of trade seems likely to develop wherever two or more cultures exist within reach of each other and have enough in common to be able to use some of the same commodities. When it does, it's likely to be one of the most powerful forces shaping the course of history. Exploring expeditions, for example, are more likely to be financed by rich people who hope to get richer importing exotic goods than by those who are merely curious about what's over the next hill. Many science-fictional scenarios are driven largely by trade and provide ample occasion for interspecies contact—as in Poul Anderson's Trader Team (part of his larger Polesotechnic League series).
Trade is not likely to happen unless 1. both parties have some interests in common, and 2. it is cheaper to get what they want from the trading partner than from some other source closer to home. The second requirement casts immediate suspicion on any plot involving, say, bringing iron and silicon to Earth from a similar planet of Alpha Centauri. There's so much iron and silicon right here that it wouldn't be worth it. (See Warren Salomon's article on “The Economics of Interstellar Commerce” and John Barnes's “How to Build a Future,” which is largely about constructing plausible economies.) The first requirement seems obvious, but is subject to change with technological advancement. If it turns out that dolphins have humanlike intelligence, it might have seemed until recently that they and we would have few common interests or conflicts. Now, of course, both are running short of fish, and dolphins in some areas are threatened by human-produced pollution. So they and we would certainly have things to talk about.
Government
While that last example might be an opportunity for trade between two species living in alien environments—e.g., dolphins bringing hard-to-mine submarine minerals to humans in exchange for farm-raised fish—it appears even more clearly an occasion for conflict resolution. I have already touched briefly on the growing importance of this as people (or aliens) live in larger and larger groups and come into more contact with other groups. A major impetus for the development and evolution of governments has been the need to maintain order within a society and to protect it from outside dangers (which usually means other governments, so the concept is clearly a mixed blessing).
Humans have experimented with many forms of government, but most of them are pretty obviously modifications and extensions of the kinds of hierarchies found in baboon troops. Even those that take great pride in being democracies tend to have at the top of the hierarchy an “alpha male” with suspiciously many of the trappings of royalty. Nevertheless, all the steps that have given previously excluded classes (such as the unpropertied, former slaves and women) a voice in their own government surely represent some of the most important kinds of progress ever made. So it seems, at least, to most of us—but might another species see it differently? In Tweedlioop I show a culture that to humans seems obviously older and wiser than our own—so they're shocked when it turns out to be a strict dictatorship. A very different kind of dictatorship than any in human history, but a dictatorship nonetheless; and I like to think their Ambassador makes a good enough case for it to disturb readers into some hard thought about both their system and ours.
A general tendency through much of our history has been toward larger governmental units: families, clans, tribes, city-states, nations, empires and various forms of international alliances and confederations. At the moment there seems to be a trend in the opposite direction, with an epidemic of Balkanization sweeping the world. Whether that is a significant new trend or just a passing aberration remains to be seen. I rather hope the latter; even though I mistrust governments as much as anyone, it's becoming clear that many problems now transcend national boundaries and will have to be solved on a global level if they are to be solved at all. For that reason I suspect that most planets that have equaled or passed Earth's present population density and technological level will have some form of world government.
What form I will not venture to specify. I suspect there are many answers, and part of the business of being a science fiction writer is to imagine some of them and work out how they might function. Whatever the level of development of your aliens, you'll need to be careful to let their governments and social institutions grow out of their history, not ours. W.R. Thompson's kya, for example, have a society that grew naturally from their background as herbivorous herd animals, which generates quite different answers to such basic questions as “How shall we pick leaders?” and “Do we even need leaders?”
The Other Government: Custom, Etiquette, Social Pressures and Morality
Formal government is by no means the only force governing individual action. Here, and likely elsewhere, it was a relative latecomer, growing out of established customs that in turn grew out of earlier animal behavior patterns. Intelligent animals can modify their habits as changing conditions warrant, but they do so reluctantly. Thus, for example, many humans still see “Be fruitful and multiply” as something they should do as well as they can, even at a time when the problem is no longer too few people, but too many.
Even in the presence of formal governments, the “unwritten laws” of custom, etiquette and social pressure remain important influences on individuals' lives—and an important source of the little details that add verisimilitude for a writer trying to bring an alien culture to life. Our lives are full of tiny gestures and nuances that carry a surprising wealth of meaning—things like a raised eyebrow or holding a door open for someone. The lives of aliens will similarly be full of such things, though of course they will be different from ours. The novels of C.J. Cherryh are known for their richness in such details, and particularly commendable for recognizing that they will be different not only from ours, but from each other.
Even within a single species, social attitudes, strictness of control over individuals and the significance attached to gestures can vary greatly from place to place and from time to time. In our culture it is rude to belch at the dinner table; in some others, it is rude not to. When I grew a beard as a young professor at an American college in the early seventies, some of my colleagues said, “It makes you look like one of the kids!”; but my grandmother (who grew up in a time when only old men wore beards) complained, “It makes you look so old!”
To a Japanese visitor to America, a piece of pie presented with its point toward a diner might be taken as an expression of hostility, while it would never occur to an American to attach any significance to the pie's orientation. Contemporary American culture has abandoned many of the symbolic requirements of etiquette and emphasized tolerance of individual choice in many (though by no means all) areas. Japanese culture, perhaps as a result of its high population density, has retained a great many social rituals and attaches great significance to any deviation from them. A great deal of life in such a culture consists of role-playing according to an elaborate script, which everyone is supposed to know. Putting food on the table the wrong way really can express hostility, if everyone present has been taught that it does; but reading that into it in a culture where everyone hasn't been so taught would be unjustifiable.
Formal religions tend to be particularly full of such strictures and rituals, and also play a large role in determining what kinds of behavior are treated as moral or immoral. Cultures that don't have formal religion or observe it strictly will have to find other ways to define, justify and enforce their moral codes—but many people on Earth already do that. Any culture will need moral codes to define what is acceptable in such areas as killing or injuring other individuals, taking or using their property, and so on. Many social dictates of acceptable behavior involve such areas as reproduction (a society must control fighting over potential mates, ensure that children are raised acceptably, and so forth), eating and elimination.
Most human cultures are quite firm about the clothing that people must wear or not wear, and read great symbolic meaning into individual choices—even in climates where clothing is not a functional necessity. Even though each society has its own ideas about what is “proper,” no two necessarily agree on such things. My brother was once refused admission to a restaurant in the South Pacific because he wasn't wearing a skirt; not too long ago, it was considered scandalous for women not to do so in this country.
To make alien cultures live and breathe, you will want to give ample attention to details of custom, gesture, morality and clothing; and you will want all of these things to grow out of your particular aliens' nature and background. Additional good examples can be found in the kya stories of W.R. Thompson, the Trimus stories of G. David Nordley, and the “Noah's Ark” stories (ReGenesis) of Julia Ecklar.
Advanced Technologies
In the last few centuries, our species has undergone a technological explosion whose consequences have radically altered virtually every aspect of life. This or something comparable is likely to happen to any intelligent, tool-using species that has science as well as technology. It may also happen, though more slowly, to longer-lived species whose technology must develop unaided by well-developed theory.
Since you're living in the midst of this explosion, many of its features are already familiar to you, though your view of them may still need a bit of stretching. Many people tend to assume, at least subconsciously, that the conditions they live under represent the final phase of development. They don't, of course; the pace of change has been accelerating steadily, and shows no sign of ceasing to do so. Since aliens you write about may be at any stage of development—before, at or after ours—I plan in the next few paragraphs to survey briefly some of the major areas that have already brought radical changes to our lives. In the next section, I'll hint at what still more radical changes might be yet to come.
Advances in agriculture, sanitation and medicine have all contributed to a greatly increased, and still rapidly growing, population. Lifespans have increased so much, thanks to disease prevention through sanitation and treatment through medicine, that people have been accumulating at an unprecedented rate. So far we've been able to get away with it, at least marginally, because improvements in agricultural technology and plant and animal breeding have also allowed us to feed more people. It remains to be seen how far that combination of circumstances can continue, but at the moment agriculture is getting a new boost from genetic engineering, which allows more drastic modification of existing plants and animals than conventional breeding.
Closely related to improvements in food production are improvements in storage and distribution. People have long used methods like salting and drying to preserve summer's food for winter consumption, or for use on long trips. Refrigeration has revolutionized the whole business, making it possible to eat food of near-fresh quality at any time of year. Portable refrigeration and rapid transportation have made it just as easy to have products grown or made in one area distributed and used in any other.
Transportation has developed dramatically, with the advent of self-propelled motor vehicles such as cars, trucks and trains, enhanced by infrastructures like high-quality roads and railroads. In this century we have even moved beyond the surface of our home world, with flight making transcontinental or transoceanic travel a routine matter of a few hours instead of the arduous adventure of months or years that it once was. All of these developments, being reasonably straightforward applications of universal physical principles, are likely to occur in some form in any technologically inclined culture that also has a scientific bent. (Though not necessarily in the same way. Imagine, for example, a world on which the conditions that led to the formation of coal and oil occurred less often or less widely than on Earth.)
Note also that there's more than one approach to many problems, some of which we've tried and abandoned in favor of an alternative. There was a brief period, for instance, when humans used lighter-than-air airships (blimps and dirigibles) that floated unhurriedly through the atmosphere. Here these have been almost entirely superseded by faster, heavier airplanes, but you can easily imagine an alien culture in which airships survived and flourished as the favored mode of flight.
We have now demonstrated, but barely begun to use, the possibility of spaceflight, going even beyond the atmosphere. It's relatively easy to see the potential value in exploiting sources of raw materials, and moving messy industry, outside our home planet's immediate neighborhood. Some of us can also see value in establishing additional “home planets,” be they actual planets or artificial habitats in space. There is strong evidence that Earth has been repeatedly subjected to planet-wide catastrophes that wiped out large numbers of species. If we really care about the long-term survival of our species, we'd do well to make sure this little planet isn't the only place it's represented.
Colonies in our Solar System will of necessity be largely artificial, ranging from pressurized domes containing small artificial habitats to whole planets, such as Venus or Mars, that have been “terra-formed,” or artificially transformed to make them more Earthlike. This will probably be true of other races in other solar systems as well. Except under very rare and special circumstances, two planets in a single system are unlikely to be so similar that natives of one could live unaided on another.
There is, however, another possibility for using a planet different from the one where you evolved. Terraforming means adapting a planet to new inhabitants; the new and rapidly developing field of genetic engineering (which also has profound implications for medicine) will enable species to remake themselves to thrive in a new and alien environment. Humans and/or other species may eventually decide that this approach is preferable, especially in cases where a planet they want to colonize already has an ecosystem. Terraforming would involve destroying that ecology to make room for ours; adapting ourselves to fit it might be a gentler and ethically more acceptable alternative. (If this consideration seems trivial or far-fetched, think of the Golden Rule and imagine an alien party wanting to “terraform” Earth!)
I can't leave this brief discussion of advanced technologies without mentioning electricity and electronics. They've been implicit in all the foregoing, since cheap, easily distributed electric power and electronic instrumentation have played central roles in all the areas I've mentioned. They have made possible a greatly increased standard of living in many parts of the world, and have made the world, as the cliche says, a much smaller place. With light-speed communication taken for granted, the ways that business and government and arts operate have changed radically. If I'd been writing this book a couple of hundred years ago, and wanted to get my editor's opinion of a proposed change in its organization, I would have had to write him a letter and wait weeks or months for his reply. Now I simply call or e-mail him, regardless of where either of us is, and the matter is taken care of in seconds or minutes.
The branch of electronics dealing with computers has so revolutionized so many aspects of life so fast that it's almost an embarrassment to the science fiction profession. Few, if any, published stories imagined that computers would ever be as small, powerful and ubiquitous as they've become in the last couple of decades. Virtually any new appliance, camera or car now contains at least one computer, giving it abilities that would have seemed like magic just a few years ago. Computers have wrought major changes in the way banking, government, medicine and the arts are done. By making it quick and easy to do calculations that couldn't be done at all without them, they've played a major role in making that explosion of new science, technology and social change happen even faster.
Will the explosion continue, here or among aliens? We'll consider that in the next section. Meanwhile, I should point out that this section has skimmed lightly over many interrelated and interacting aspects of human history. As a science fiction writer you'll probably find it helpful to know as much as you can about our own species' past, and in particular how various fields of endeavor have influenced each other. Such knowledge is likely to give you ideas for stories, both in terms of what circumstances are likely to produce what kinds of responses, and in terms of how things might have developed differently if conditions were different. Two books I've found particularly useful for such studies, in addition to the ones I've already mentioned, are H.G. Wells's Outline of History (even though it necessarily stops well short of the present and includes some outdated opinions) and Bernard Grun and Werner Stein's The Timetables of History. This last has an unusual and particularly instructive feature. It shows events in different areas of human endeavor in parallel columns, so you can see at a glance what was happening in many areas at any time.
IN TIMES TO COME: OLDER AND WISER?
Once a civilization reaches a stage comparable to our present one, there is the potential for a great deal of further development, at an ever-increasing rate. All the fields I've mentioned in the last section are changing rapidly, and every new development opens up previously unsuspected possibilities. Furthermore, activities in different fields are synergistic, finding applications in seemingly unrelated fields. Computers, for example, were originally developed to assist mathematicians and engineers with number-crunching, but they have also greatly accelerated the development of every other field of science, radically changed the ways that arts and publishing are done, and made possible such medical advances as the CAT scan. So important is this synergistic effect that almost any forecast of when a particular advance is likely to happen will be much too conservative—if such progress is allowed to continue and accelerate. K. Eric Drexler in Engines of Creation and Vernor Vinge in Marooned in Realtime have, independently and in different language, extrapolated the rapidly climbing curves of progress to foresee a “Singularity,” a time when the curves of change grow so steep that humanity undergoes a sudden, radical transformation to something new and so utterly different that we can barely imagine what it might be. Some intelligent species may already have undergone such a transformation.
Or it may be quite rare. It's relatively easy to imagine reasons why the current rates of change, and acceleration of change, may not continue. A growing anti-scientific element in our own culture has already significantly reduced the emphasis on basic research, and could, if it goes far enough, lead to another “Dark Age” in which little new knowledge is learned and much old knowledge is lost. Or we (or any other species in a comparable situation) could destroy ourselves, accidentally or foolishly—because, at least so far, human progress has been closely tied to controlling larger and larger amounts of energy. In this century we have learned to use (and abuse) nuclear fission, and are currently struggling to put reins and harness on fusion. There is no reason to assume that, if we can survive those, we might not move on to still bigger things.
As described in Shklovskii and Sagan's Intelligent Life in the Universe, astrophysicist N.S. Kardashev suggested dividing possible technologically advanced civilizations into three classes according to their energy use:
I. A civilization with energy use and technology levels comparable to contemporary Earth.
II. A civilization capable of using the entire energy output of its primary star. (Science-fictional example: Larry Niven's Ringworld)
III. A civilization able to use energy at the rate produced by an entire galaxy.
The Kyyra in my novels The Sins of the Fathers and Lifeboat Earth fall somewhere between Kardashev classes II and III—intentionally closer to II (they move planets and induce supernovas as a means of producing raw materials) and accidentally closer to III (an industrial accident on a scale far beyond our present capabilities sets off a chain reaction of supernovas, exploding the entire core of a galaxy). If we continue to use larger and larger quantities of energy, we or our descendants may eventually undertake projects of comparable magnitude—and have to deal with corresponding risks.
Tiny Technologies?
On the other hand, the trend toward more and more energy use may not continue, or at least may not continue to steepen so precipitously. We might instead (or in addition) learn to accomplish more with less energy. Some of our efforts have already turned in this direction. Automobiles are more fuel-efficient than they were a few years ago, and expected to become still more so. The computer on which I'm writing sits comfortably on an old typewriter table and wields far more computing power than the one I used in graduate school, which filled a very large room and required far more electricity. Those and other movements we have already seen toward making things smaller and more efficient will probably be mere drops in the bucket compared to some we can anticipate.
Perhaps the most profound of these is nanotechnology, the embryonic technology of building virtually anything atom by atom, using programmed molecule-sized machines called assemblers. Possibility in principle is demonstrated by our own existence. Biological systems are naturally occurring nanotechnological systems in which DNA carries full instructions that direct active molecules to build and operate complete macroscopic organisms. As K. Eric Drexler points out in his book Engines of Creation and in his shorter article with Chris Peterson, the fact that nature does it means that we can learn to do it at least as well—and perhaps better and with a wider range of applications. Drexler's arguments are scientifically conservative; nanotechnology looks likely to transform our lives, and those of any beings who decide to explore that road, so profoundly that I can only hint at the possibilities here and urge you to read his books.
Another emerging technology that may reduce the energy needs of its users is virtual reality: computer-generated sensory experiences that mimic reality so convincingly that they can replace reality for some purposes. Rocket pilots, for example, might receive much of their training by “flying” virtual rockets, requiring only a little electricity instead of tons of rocket fuel. They might even conduct actual explorations by means of virtual vehicles, using the closely related technology of telepresence. Virtual reality, as the term is usually used, means a “reality” that is generated by a computer and may be completely fictitious. Telepresence feels the same to a user, except that the virtual reality he experiences is a simulation of an actual reality, transmitted by another computer which is operating one or more robots there. Thus a “pilot” might explore a new planet through the artificial senses of a small, agile robot probe with no need for life-support systems. We may do this ourselves, or we may meet aliens only through their robot probes. Or you can imagine a radically different scenario: Instead of using telepresence to explore the real universe, a species might retreat into virtual reality and abandon most contact with the “real” world.
Non-Technological Hurdles
Whichever way we or any other species might choose to jump (and there's no reason an entire species has to jump the same way!), it's pretty clear that once a species reaches our current level or something comparable, it will have to clear some important non-technological hurdles to get much further. We have progressed to the point where we can do a great many things we couldn't before—including destroying ourselves by such means as nuclear war, runaway industrial pollution or overpopulation. Our species is currently trying to learn to cope with these things; its prospects for future survival and prosperity will depend on its ability to do so.
Will we succeed? I hope so…. In the universe at large, how likely is any species to succeed? We have no data on which to base a definitive answer, but for a science fiction writer's purposes it may be enough to say that some species probably will. There may be as many ways to succeed as there are to fail, and most of both may be as hard for us to visualize or understand as it would be for a gibbon to understand the appeal of Tolstoy. However, it is the science fiction writer's business to try to imagine some of the possibilities, and to make them seem real and comprehensible.
In early science fiction, aliens were commonly little more than clever monsters bent on destruction, for reasons that were at best vaguely defined. It's hard to get that sort of thing past editors now; we now expect any species' actions to make sense in terms of its own nature and background. But even our own species' future attitudes are likely to change so much, so fast, that we might have difficulty understanding them. If you try to imagine our own great-or great-great-grandparents reading a description of America in the early 1990s, you may get some inkling of how hard they might have found it to believe, much less understand, our current tax rates, dress codes, moral standards and so forth.
So it will be quite a stretch to imagine beings who are older or “more advanced” than ourselves, even if they started out quite similar to us. When I wrote “… And Comfort to the Enemy,” about an advanced civilization with an all-biological technology, both my editor and I thought I was depicting something so alien that we wouldn't even recognize it as an advanced civilization. Within ten years I could see hints that we ourselves were starting down a road that could easily lead to such a future.
So where might we, or aliens more or less like us, be after an additional hundred or thousand or ten thousand years of history? Natural evolution seems unlikely to make much difference in our physical form. If punctuated-equilibrium theorists like Stephen Jay Gould are right, major evolutionary changes occur only in response to major environmental changes, and civilization by its nature tends to minimize evolutionary pressures. A couple of qualifications: If we stay on one planet, which is increasingly shrunken by easy transportation, racial separations are likely to blur and gradually disappear. On the other hand, if we colonize other planets and the colonies have little contact with each other, the isolated populations will tend to diverge, eventually becoming separate species. And, of course, any species that gets heavily into genetic engineering may remake itself in one or more ways that nature couldn't have.
That and other ways that cultures learn to cope with the problems mentioned above may seem quite strange and perhaps distasteful to contemporary humans. My Kyyra, for example, have forgotten the concept of war, but they have also forgotten pets. To deal with large, growing populations and ecological problems, they long ago learned to replace natural ecosystems with simplified, completely engineered and controlled artificial systems, with no natural life-forms left except themselves. Such an idea likely seems repugnant to you, but I find it all too easy to imagine our own species following a path leading there. The Kyyra have eliminated interpersonal and interfaction stresses by going far beyond what we think of as world government—their “Coordinator” is an enormously complex computer that continually monitors minds and makes adjustments as needed to ensure that everyone gets along.
The possibility of such things suggests that, while the heavy-handed alien invaders of yore now seem quaint and unlikely, neither can we assume, as some have, that any species that has achieved starflight will be so morally advanced that they would be no threat to others. They must have found some way to avoid destroying themselves; but their way of doing that could easily involve one of their factions destroying or dominating all others, and that tendency could just as easily extend to other species they met in their travels.
Really Big Civilizations
How likely are such travels, and how far might they extend? I have already said a little about travel within a species' native solar system. So far this has been done mostly with chemical rockets, which is extremely expensive—but then, chemical rockets are quite an inefficient way of going about it. A large part of the problem is that they must carry their own fuel with them, and many designs routinely discard major parts of the vehicle itself (both of which pose special difficulties for round trips!). So a lot of thinking has gone into ways to avoid these problems, including reusable spacecraft, nuclear rather than chemical rockets (which run into large problems with public acceptance), and rockets designed to collect return fuel at a destination (see the first two Zubrin references) . Others have suggested ways to get in and out of Earth's gravity well more efficiently, as in Arnold and Kingsbury's article “The Spaceport,” about an orbiting spaceport that stores energy and momentum released by a docking spacecraft for use by one departing later. Still others propose completely non-rocket propulsion systems such as electromagnetic catapults and sails using light and the particulate “wind” from the sun or light from ground-based lasers. (See, for example, Zubrin's “The Magnetic Sail.”)
Until fairly recently, most people other than science fiction writers tended to assume that manned interstellar flight beyond the solar system was impractical. The distances are huge (the closest star is more than four light-years from the Sun), and the amounts of energy required to reach even that in a human lifetime are enormous. However, a variety of ways around those problems have been explored by science fiction writers—and more recently but quite seriously by actual physicists (some of whom, such as Robert L. Forward and Geoffrey A. Landis, are also science fiction writers).
One early way around the energy and distance problems is the generation ship: a relatively slow ship that might take hundreds or thousands of years to go from one star to another, with generations of crew living or dying on board. An obvious problem with that, even if you can develop an onboard life-support system that can be trusted for so long, is that crew born aboard ship are likely to have little conception of, or interest in, either the “home” planet the ship started from or the destination that it's bound for. The ship is their universe and likely to develop a peculiar culture of its own (as in Robert A. Heinlein's story “Universe”).
Another approach, if you can get enough energy, takes advantage of the relativistic effect called time dilation. I won't go into the details here, but if you want to see them (and you should, if you plan to make this an important part of your story) I recommend Taylor and Wheeler's Spacetime Physics. The essential result for storytelling purposes is that if you travel at a sizable fraction of the speed of light, the trip appears to you, the traveler, to take less time than it does to an observer back at the spaceport you left.
The relationship is where tship is the trip time measured aboard the ship, tport is the trip time as it appears to a non-traveling observer at either end, v is the ship's speed relative to starting point and destination, and c is the speed of light. At low speeds, the time dilation factor (the square root) is so close to 1.0 that it's hard to notice the difference between the two times. But as v gets close to c, the trip time experienced by the crew gets smaller and smaller, as shown in table 6-1. It also gets harder and harder to accelerate the ship any further, and Einstein's theory of relativity (with support from experimental data) at least suggests that the speed of light is a strictly enforced limit beyond which we can't go.
How to attain such speeds? It isn't easy, but physicists have worked out several methods in considerable detail, including antimatter rockets, beamed energy systems, solar sails and fusion ramjets that gather sparse interstellar material for fuel. An excellent guide to these and other aspects of interstellar flight (which incidentally tells you a good deal about more ordinary propulsion within a solar system, and contains lots of in-depth references) is Eugene Mallove and Gregory Matloff 's The Starflight Handbook.
v/ctporttship0.14342.7840.221.521.0660.314.33313.6730.410.759.8530.58.67.4480.67.1675.7330.76.1434.3870.85.3753.2250.94.7782.0830.924.6741.8320.944.5741.5610.964.4791.2540.984.3880.8730.994.3430.6130.9994.3040.192TABLE 6-1 Trip Time from Sol to Alpha CentauriThe left column shows travel speed as a fraction of c, the speed of light. The middle column shows the length of the trip at that speed in years, as measured by an observer on Earth or a planet of Alpha Centauri. The last column shows the length of the trip as measured by the travelers aboard ship. Shipboard time is always less than “port” time—only slightly so, until v/c gets fairly large, but very dramatically when v is quite close to c.
These considerations of spaceflight will obviously be of interest a couple of chapters hence, in connection with human-alien interactions. Our present interest in them stems from their relevance to the question “Can a society (human or alien) get bigger than a single planet?” An old standby in science fiction is the galactic empire, republic or federation. How likely is that?
Even for a much smaller interstellar civilization—say, one including a few solar systems in a region of space spanning a dozen or so light-years—the problems are large and the rewards not necessarily commensurate. Assuming that we're limited to the kinds of physics we've considered so far, travel or communication between member worlds will take years and cost fortunes. What would make it worthwhile? You don't go light-years afield to import commodities that you can make far more cheaply at home. You don't mount expensive expeditions to defend yourself against beings so remote that they can't afford to mount expensive expeditions against you. Interstellar colonization seems more likely to lead to a proliferation of largely independent civilizations, though there may be a limited trade in information and alien artifacts. George Ochoa and Jeffrey Osier devote a chapter of The Writer's Guide to Creating a Science Fiction Universe to the problems and possibilities of galactic-scale civilizations.
Of course, everything I've said about why interstellar civilizations are likely to be smallish and loosely knit could change dramatically if one or more species discovered new kinds of physics allowing faster-than-light travel and/or communication. In the last couple of decades, physicists have been noticing possible loopholes in relativity that just might mean the speed limit isn't as absolute as we thought. (See Dr. Robert L. Forward's Analog article “Faster Than Light.”) And it's by no means inconceivable that someone will eventually discover whole new areas of physics that suggest ways to go quickly, easily and cheaply across interstellar distances. I won't say much about those now, since for the time being we're limiting ourselves to what can be foreseen with present scientific knowledge. However, such a technology could open up the possibility of a very far-flung yet closely knit and fluidly interacting civilization, so I will say a bit more about such “new science” in chapter eleven.
For now, the important fact for a writer about aliens is that any possibilities that we can imagine for ourselves are just as plausible for other intelligences somewhat like us. Anything we can do, or clearly see the possibility of doing later, somebody else can do, too.
AND IF THEY AREN'T LIKE US?
Throughout this chapter, I've sprinkled fictional examples of how some aspect of an alien society might develop differently from the same aspect in ours. Could a society be so alien that some of its features have no counterpart in ours (or vice versa) ?
An advanced society might evolve, for example, from something analogous to our social insects: bees, wasps, termites and ants. These have elaborate social structures in which thousands of individuals are highly specialized to serve very specific functions in the operation of the hive as a whole. Individual actions are determined by a combination of hard-wired programming and messages exchanged between individuals by such means as coded chemicals or the “dancing language” of honeybees. The actions of any one individual (except the queen) are not very important; individuals are largely interchangeable and expendable, and none can live very long except as part of the hive. In a sense, the hive is more like an intelligent animal man a herd, and the constituent individual insects more like its cells. Considering the complexity already achieved by some of these insect societies, it's not too hard to imagine some developing to a point comparable to our cities or even larger units. In such a society, concepts such as “individual rights” and “democracy” might be almost incomprehensibly alien; indeed, the concept of an individual as a complete being might be so. The Taurans in Joe Haldeman's The Forever War appear to have a hive-like mentality.
To dolphins, or similar beings evolved elsewhere, cities themselves might be a hard concept to grasp, with their implications of many individuals living virtually their entire lives in crowded locales full of artificial boundaries. My “Pinocchio” is a product of a type of culture that bottlenose dolphins might have. My speculations were based on actual research results, and we still can't completely rule out the possibility that they might have such a society. (Even if they don't, something much like it may still exist elsewhere!) Their lifestyle is even more nomadic than that of human nomads; they roam over vast distances in a world that is essentially three-dimensional (ours is largely two-dimensional) and they don't build artifacts because they don't have hands. Fire is impractical where they live, so the notion of cooking food would probably seem quite odd to them. Lying and deceit, so deeply entrenched in virtually all human cultures, might be hard for a dolphin to imagine. Visceral reactions associated with emotional stress would be hard to hide, since dolphins' bodies are literally transparent to each other's sensing sounds!
Still other very alien cultures can be imagined, often by starting with some group of animals found on Earth and imagining how it might evolve—such as the starfish-like Radiates in Naomi Mitchi-son's Memoirs of a Spacewoman. Most cultures are likely to have some elements that correspond recognizably to aspects of human cultures, but may also have some that don't. In general, the more different your animals are from primates, and the more different their environment from the one in which primates evolved, the more different the cultures will be.
Habitual flight, for example, would have lots of consequences. The Overlords in Arthur C. Clarke's Childhood's End have cities without walkways and with doors placed at arbitrary elevations. The Ythrians in Poul Anderson's The People of the Wind don't have real cities, and that vision may be more likely. Their mobility makes permanent crowding unnecessary, and the great energy needs of flying have made them voracious carnivores, who must live thinly spread, maintaining and defending large territories.
Numerous other fictional examples are scattered through the literature. You might find it helpful to browse in Barlowe's Guide to Extraterrestrials for a quick introduction to several, and then track down the original stories to read in more depth about some that interest you.
You'll probably also find it helpful, as a source of ideas, to read widely about Earthly animals and imagine what kinds of societies might evolve from them. What sort of attitudes might we have toward death and the value of life, for example, if our parents laid thousands of eggs and knew that only 1 percent of them would produce children who would survive to adulthood? If we shed our skins, like snakes or lizards, might our parents decorate the house with shed skins from childhood the way some human parents put pencil marks on a wall to track their offspring's growth?
The best general advice I can give a writer who would write about alien societies is this: Learn all you can about ethology, anthropology and history—in their broadest senses—and then go beyond them. Let them suggest directions for you to go, and then follow those leads as far as you can.
