---

author: ["Schmidt Stanley"]
title: "Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series - part0015.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Schmidt Stanley - Aliens  Alien Societies A Writers Guide to Creating Extraterrestrial LifeForms Science Fiction Writing Series"
tags: ["story", "would", "human", "alien", "could", "way", "might", "specie", "planet", "one", "make", "much", "first", "kya", "world", "kind", "many", "like", "idea", "gravity", "use", "set", "background", "example", "thing"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/AliensAlienSocietiesAWritersGuidetoCreatingExtraterrestrialLifeFormsScienceFictionWritingSeries-part0015html

---


Book Title
CHAPTER 10
Case Studies
So far we have looked at various aspects of creating and writing about aliens, illustrating each with examples from real science fiction. In actual writing, of course, you will seldom be dealing with any of those aspects in isolation. No real species, and no adequately realized fictitious species, is only an adaptation to a particular kind of starlight or atmosphere or gravity, or characterized only by its language or religion or technology. Real species are necessarily the product of everything that went into producing them. The way a star forms shapes the planets that form with it. The way a planet forms shapes the things that live on it. The way a species evolves shapes any civilization it might develop. In writing your own science fiction, you will usually have to think about at least a few of these areas in conjunction with each other, and sometimes you will have to think about all of them. The purpose of this chapter is to give you some examples of how that process has worked in the development of some existing stories—not isolated examples of physical forms or linguistic structures, but the creation of an integrated combination of world and alien that clearly belong together.
Since many aspects of the stories I'll be discussing have already been described in earlier chapters, I will not repeat all that here. My object now is simply to give you a brief look at the overall process of creating several stories, as examples of the range of ways it can work and how the pieces fit together and influence each other. As I've said earlier, there is no set formula. How you approach creating a story, and how much effort you put into any particular aspect of it, depends on what you're trying to do with it and how interested you are in this or that. As Hal Clement suggests, “Work out your world and its creatures as long as it remains fun; then write your story, making use of any of the details you have worked out which help the story.” Perhaps inevitably, the stories whose backgrounds and developments I know best are my own. Fortunately those include a variety of goals and approaches, and I do know at least a little about some stories by others.
A FEW OF MY OWN…
Aliens may be very like humans, or very different from us. The very similar ones are probably so rare that it's generally best not to use them unless you have a particular reason to do so—and even then, you must be careful how you use them. One story that needed very humanoid aliens, and a world to fit them, is my…
Newton and the Quasi-Apple
Newton grew from an idea that originally had nothing to do with aliens: “quasimaterials,” or artificial kinds of “matter” with properties different from those of natural matter. I first attempted to use these in a satirical farce set in near-future academia (I was in graduate school and looking for an assistant professorship at the time), but editor John W. Campbell said the idea was too good to waste on such a trivial story line. I wasn't sure what else to do with it until the following fall, when I had that assistant professorship and for the first time found myself developing my own course and lectures.
It's been said that the best way to learn something is to teach it, and I've found a lot of truth in that. As a physics student, I'd never fully appreciated the magnitude of Isaac Newton's accomplishment in formulating his laws of motion and gravitation. From my twentieth-century perspective, it all seemed so simple. It wasn't until the night before I was supposed to tell my students about it that it really hit me what an awesome achievement it was for somebody who knew only what Newton knew in the seventeenth century.
It hit me hard. It haunted my subconscious that whole night, and the next morning, when I was giving the lecture I'd thought out the night before, something else happened. Right in the middle of it, something leaped out of my subconscious and demanded, “Could he still have done it if somebody'd shown him quasimaterials that didn't follow his laws?”
I realized right away that that was the extra ingredient I needed to write a quasimaterial story I could sell John Campbell. I could hardly wait to write it down in my pocket notebook, before I lost it, but I had to finish the lecture first. I wrote it down right outside the door, as soon as class was over, before I even went back to my office.
That incident illustrates something that happens quite often in writing: A story grows, not from a single idea, but from two or more seemingly unrelated ideas colliding and igniting. The note in my pocket notebook was still a long way from being a story, of course. I needed to decide who the characters were, and all the background that went with them. I could have done it as an alternate-Earth story, with aliens or time travelers showing the real Isaac Newton quasimaterials, destroying his faith in his theories, and thereby thwarting the next major step in the development of science. Or I could do it by having future humans visit a world on which a local counterpart of Newton was about to make comparable breakthroughs, and inadvertently cause him the same sort of problems.
I chose the latter, partly because it was the first one that occurred to me and partly because it was easier. To use the real Sir Isaac, I would have had to do extensive research on his life and times, because science fiction readers love to catch writers in error about real, verifiable facts. That type of story can be fun, but at that point in my life I didn't have time to do that research. It might have taken me a year to do it to my satisfaction; I had an editor interested now and I thought it had been too long since I'd sold him anything. So I wanted to send him a good story soon, before he forgot he was interested.
If I put the whole thing in the future and used an alien Newton-analog, I could make the whole thing up and nobody could catch me in contradiction of historic fact. All I had to do was make it reasonably consistent internally, and I had a head start on that because I already had an outline of a future history in which I'd set other stories. So with that as my human background, I sent the cultural survey team of Chet and Tina Barlin to a world where they would find an excuse to introduce a very few carefully selected examples of quasimaterials, which most of the locals would uncritically accept as “magic.”
Except “Newton.” He might be troubled by the doubts I mentioned above, but he'd also have an even bigger proble m—especially if he'd already pretty well formulated his laws and felt good about them. The local establishment, feeling threatened by his new ideas, might seize upon the quasimaterials as evidence that his theories were nonsense and ridicule him into oblivion. The Barlins, realizing this had happened, would have to find a way to undo the damage.
Because of the fundamental nature of the story I wanted to tell, I needed unusually humanoid aliens, which made some parts of my job easier. They had to be pretty humanoid because I wanted their history to parallel ours pretty closely, up to the point where I threw in the monkey wrench. To be that humanoid, they had to evolve on an Earthlike planet, complete with a similar axial tilt and consequently similar climate patterns. So I could take much of the physical background as qualitatively similar to what we're used to, with only “cosmetic” changes such as a different kind of autumnal color change and leaf loss, and domestic animals whose edible parts could be plucked off like fruit and regenerated instead of killing the whole animal.
Since I already had a good excuse to use an unusually Earthlike planet, I went so far as to make its intelligent natives so humanoid that humans could pass themselves off as travelers from an unfamiliar part of the same planet instead of admitting they were from the stars. That was highly desirable for story purposes, since it let humans who were not supposed to admit that interact more directly than they otherwise could have. Of course, they weren't completely identical to the natives, so it helped that the locals were used to seeing and accepting a lot of unfamiliar things. The local theocracy—the one under whose auspices Terek (my “Newton”) worked took as a fundamental precept that, “Magnificent and infinitely varied are the ways of the Supreme Presence.” So, naturally, they wouldn't take kindly to a theory that put limits on the ways of the the Supreme Presence….
The Kyyra
In Newton I had special reasons for using a very Earthlike planet with very humanoid inhabitants. Such things may well be out there, but you wouldn't want to make a habit of using them in your stories. There are too many other possibilities, and the ones that much like us must be quite rare.
The Kyyra, in The Sins of the Fathers and Lifeboat Earth, are fairly humanoid, but nowhere near as much so as the Kemrekl in Newton—and they came to us. Like the Kemrekl, their nature was shaped in part by the story I wanted to tell and the role I wanted them to play in it. And, like Newton, that story grew from the collision of several ideas, only one of which had anything to do with aliens.
It started with the realization that a faster-than-light ship could overtake light that had already passed Earth and thereby get a second look at an astronomical event that Earth-based astronomers saw before they had good enough instruments to study it well. By itself, that didn't make much of a story, but Ben Bova, who was editing Analog then, goaded me to build something on it. I began to see how I might do that when I realized that an FTL ship that set out to get a second look at an “old” astronomical event, could also get an “advance” look at an event from which no light had yet reached us. In particular, I remembered thinking, when reading about the galactic core explosions sometimes seen in other galaxies, that one could have occurred in our Galaxy any time in the last 30,000 years—and we wouldn't know about it until the first light reached us.
Eventually I saw that that could combine naturally with one more entry in my unused idea file: “Suppose the Earth were about to become uninhabitable and aliens offered to rescue us, but refused to discuss the reasons for their offer. Should we accept their help?”
That's the kind of question that's clearly the germ of a story. To answer it, I had to think about the answers to a whole complex of subsidiary questions, of which the most important for our present purposes was, “What kind of aliens were they and what were their reasons for offering to help?”
Giving them a plausible motive was quite a challenge. They had to come from closer to the galactic center than us, to know about it before us and already be fleeing to another galaxy. But why should they be looking for other victims and taking time and trouble to help them escape, too? Admittedly aliens might have different priorities than humans, but pure unmitigated altruism would be, at best, hard for most human readers to swallow. Fortunately, somewhere my subconscious reminded me of two things: That a much more advanced civilization might be capable of manipulating whole stars, and that some astronomers had suggested that in a region where stars are packed tightly together, a supernova might set off a chain reaction of other supernovas.
And guilt can be a powerful motivator, easily recognized and understood by human readers. Not that it will work the same way in all intelligent species, but a feeling of responsibility for actions and their consequences will often be a species survival trait….
So suppose the Kyyra started the core explosion, and therefore felt obligated to try to help any innocent victims they found on the way out. I already knew they had to be much older and more technologically advanced than us, since the basic premise depended on their being able to move whole planets, populations and all, across intergalactic distances at FTL speeds. Given that, it was relatively easy to accept that they routinely practiced industry on a stellar scale—things like setting off supernovas to make heavy elements. If they lived close to the core, they might try it in a region where stars were a little too densely packed for that to be safe.
And it seemed perfectly natural that, while they might feel obliged to offer help, they wouldn't want to talk about it. “Hi, neighbor. I live down the pike a piece and I just blew up your galaxy….” I was beginning to see how the big picture fit together. I knew what had happened, why they were offering to help, and why they didn't want to discuss it. I knew they were way beyond us, in at least some ways—but I still needed to know who they were, to make them real enough for humans to care about and react to.
So I tried to imagine in some detail what a much older humanoid culture might be like, and how it got that way. I wound up exploring the broad outlines of several thousand years of their history and inventing some new physics, with quite specific properties and limitations, for them to use in their FTL planet-moving. I didn't know a lot of details about their planet of origin; neither did they, since it was so far in their past and they had since spread to so many others and changed them so much. It seemed quite likely that they might have followed a trend that many humans sometimes seem bent on—filling their entire planet with themselves at the expense of almost everything else. A more or less natural planet, like Earth, still harboring a multitude of naturally occurring life-forms, might be to them a completely strange, beautiful yet terrifying thing. To enable that many of them to live together, my subconscious dredged up another idea I had once tried unsuccessfully to use by itself: a massive computer, combining functions and attributes of God and government, that continually monitors and adjusts individual minds to live in harmony.
For the humans to whom the Kyyra brought bad tidings, the urge to survive an overwhelming catastrophe had to battle with fear of trusting obviously powerful beings who are very secretive about their motives. So the human need to make a decision on the Kyyra offer was inextricably entwined with the desire to solve the mystery of why.
To make humans even consider their offer seriously, the Kyyra had to make a particular kind of impression on those who saw them. If they had been wimpy, ugly little guys who didn't seem to know what they were doing, there wouldn't have been much conflict—few people would have even given much thought to accepting their offer. So I made them an imposing presence: statuesque, clad in resplendent robes, giving every impression of being older, wiser and very much in control. The only problem was that they wouldn't say what was in it for them___
The key to learning was a single human, Sandy, with a history of establishing easy rapport with both people and animals, who befriended the Kyyra ambassador, Beldan. She began to see the more vulnerable side of him and his species and eventually got to visit their orbiting ship. There she found enough extra clues to figure out what was going on. Here, too, little pieces fit together in a multitude of ways. For example, in their clothing and shipboard furnishings, the Kyyra made casual use of what humans consider precious metals, made possible by their industrial use of supernovas.
Pinocchio
Once the decision was made (in a way I won't divulge) and the Earth was on its way, I needed one more alien—the dolphin Pinocchio. Lifeboat Earth is an episodic story (the five major sections first appeared as independent novelettes in Analog) spanning several decades. Even with Kyyra technology, so far beyond ours that it looked like magic, moving Earth to the galaxy M31 was an unprece-dentedly traumatic experience. Homo sapiens would survive, but many individuals and many other species would not. Life during the journey would be grim and bleak, and even some who would live out normal lifespans would not live to see its end.
People can't get their emotional teeth into a tragedy that big. To make them feel how grim it is, you have to narrow the focus and show them how it affects an individual life. You have to let them watch it hurt somebody they care about—which means first you have to make them care, and then you have to let the hurt happen.
One of the most tragic aspects of Earth's flight from the galaxy was the extinction of other species, so I wanted to tell a story about one of the last members of one of those species. There would be many such losses, but the ones humans would feel most deeply would be those of obviously intelligent species toward which people felt sympathetic—especially if they could speak for themselves. Bottlenose dolphins seemed ideal, since some research suggested they could speak for themselves, and most humans found them unusually likable. So I immersed myself in that research and did some observing of my own. I figured out what sort of culture and personalities they might have, based on the research to date, and how the Earth-moving experience might look to them. Then I set Sandy to the task of trying to talk one of the last survivors out of letting himself be the last.
It was a unique alien-building experience, which several others (e.g., Mark Jarvis in “Collaboration”) have also done in their own ways. As in my other examples, I needed an alien to play a certain kind of role in a story. But since this was a real alien about which a considerable amount was known, I couldn't create it from whole cloth. I had to start with the known facts and build on them. My total picture is fictitious, but includes many real elements. Yet, from a human standpoint, it is a truly alien intelligence.
…AND A FEW BY OTHERS
My examples so far have started with a concept of the general shape of a story, and developed aliens appropriate to it. As the aliens took concrete form, of course, their nature dictated many of the details of the story; good characters of any kind are unwilling to be mere puppets for a preconceived plot. But in all these cases the general concept came first, and the aliens were created to fit it.
That's not, of course, the only way it can happen. Another category of approaches is what I might call the “Because It's There” method, in which the author first figures out that a particular kind of interesting alien or world can exist, explores its characteristics, and then sees what kinds of story it suggests.
Mission of Gravity
Hal Clement is one of the most avid and skilled practitioners of this approach. In Mission of Gravity, for example, he recognized some of the properties an extremely massive planet might have, such as very high surface gravity and a very rapid spin rate, leading to a flattened shape and an extreme variation in apparent gravity from equator to poles. Clement had the ability and interest to work these things out in quantitative detail for a planet named Mesklin, so he did. Once armed with that knowledge, he was in a position to figure out what sorts of things could live there, how they might evolve, and what kinds of problems both they and human explorers might face. From there it was natural for his focus to narrow to individual Mesklinites and visitors and specific problems, and let those generate a story. Fortunately for those who would like to see something of the process and how the pieces fit together, he also put quite a bit of that into the fact article “Whirligig World,” and I can summarize some of the highlights here.
His inspiration was not purely abstract, but grew out of real astronomical research published by K. Aa. Strand on 61 Cygni, a binary star system eleven light-years from Earth. These were the first observations suggesting that a star other than the Sun had a “planetary” companion. It couldn't be seen from Earth, but its presence and some of its gross characteristics could be deduced from perturbations in the orbits of the other components. At a time when other solar systems were almost purely conjectural, Clement was naturally fascinated by the possibility that here, finally, was direct evidence for another abode for life. He set about considering what it might be like and what, if anything, might live there.
The unseen companion of 61 Cygni A—Mesklin—appeared to be more massive than any of our planets. With about sixteen times the mass of Jupiter, its core must be so compressed that its diameter would actually be a bit less than that of Uranus. It's a bordlerline case—it could be a very faint star (a brown dwarf) or a superjovian planet. Clement chose to regard it as more planet than star, which made it easier to set action there—but still not easy.
With so much mass in such a small package, its surface gravity would be some three hundred times that of Earth. That would be a very serious problem for any humans who wanted to explore it, and Clement wanted to put humans there. As a scientist himself, he knew that the first thing humans would want to do with such a world would be to learn all they could about it; and human characters make it easier for a human reader to get into a story. But Clement didn't want to depend on “magic,” such as “gravity shields,” to make that possible.
Fortunately known science provided another way—and using it suggested many elements of the story. It was highly probable (remember our discussions of star and planet formation) that Mesklin would be spinning quite rapidly. Even if it remained spherical, that would mean that the “effective gravity” felt by someone standing on the equator would be less than that at the poles, because the actual gravity would be partly offset by “centrifugal force” at the equator. Moreover, it wouldn't be spherical, because such spinning would also tend to flatten the planet along its polar axis. This would make the difference in effective gravity between equator and poles even larger, since the actual gravity would be stronger at the poles. Clement developed a model of Mesklin including specific numbers for size, rotation rate and related quantities. The most important of these for story purposes are the effective surface gravity, ranging from 3g at the equator (g = gravitational acceleration on Earth) to 700g at the poles.
That made it marginally possible to send the humans to the equator, though it would still be so uncomfortable that they would only go personally as a last resort. They started with an unmanned research probe to the high-gravity south pole—but it refused to respond to the command to come home. Some of its data was sent back by telemetry, but for much of it the researchers needed to recover the probe itself.
There's the beginning of a story situation—a large investment in an important research project, and much of the valuable data trapped where the researchers can't get at it. The driving problem is: How can they salvage as much as possible? They do go personally, building a station on the relatively low-g equator, to do what they can. They can't go to the higher latitudes, but they meet a native who can.
To create plausible Mesklinites who could try to rescue the humans' lost probe, Clement had to consider both the biochemical and physical requirements imposed by the environment. For the former, he got some help from biochemist Isaac Asimov, the two of them brainstorming the biochemical outlines of a system that could produce hydrogen-breathing animals. Because of the high gravity, falling would be extremely dangerous, so animals living there would be built of sturdy material, small and low to the ground. Thus Mesklinite hero Barlennan looks rather like a centipede, with other features such as those I've mentioned in earlier chapters.
Barlennan is described by Clement as “captain and owner of a tramp ship, half trader and (probably) half pirate.” The story is his quest to recover the information locked in the humans' probe, which requires Barlennan and his crew to travel farther and farther into the high-gravity high latitudes, in the process encountering various Mesklinite cultures and physical problems posed by the increasingly hostile environment.
Much of the action generates itself. Once the author sees a problem his characters are likely to encounter, they must find a way to deal with it. Much of the author's work consisted of “finding things that are taken for granted on our world and would not be true on this one.” Those include such things as the impossibility of throwing, jumping or flying, at least in the upper latitudes. On Mesklin, the fear of heights and falling runs deep and pervades everything, for a very good reason. A sixty-foot cliff encountered at one point in the story amounts to an insurmountable obstacle; and one native culture has good engineers, but their greatest accomplishments are walls three inches high.
The People of the Wind
If Mission of Gravity is an example of a story in which the setting came first and led then to a set of aliens and a story involving them, Poul Anderson's The People of the Wind exemplifies a variation in which the aliens came first and world and story grew around them. Certain elements of the story contain strong hints at its origins. I suspect it began with looking at the common assumption that winged flight and intelligence are incompatible—that intelligence requires brain and body to be too big, while flight requires them to be too small—and questioning it. The question “How could a winged creature be intelligent?” leads (as usual) to a series of subsidiary questions. What kind of a planet would make it easier? What features of body design would help? How might those evolve? What sorts of behavior would evolve along with them? How might those turn into civilization?
The People of the Wind contains unusually explicit discussions of how the answers to those questions developed, influenced each other and led ultimately to the growth of a distinctive, memorable and very alien civilization. The story is largely character-driven, but the characters—like human characters—grow out of their species' evolutionary background and their individual circumstances.
Perhaps at least in part because the Ythrian culture is so alien, the author chose to have it share a planet with humans, a new composite culture growing out of the interaction between the two. Ben Bova has observed that a useful way to generate a story is to rub two characters together and watch what happens. The same is true of cultures. The humans in The People of the Wind not only provide a “reader-friendly” window into Ythrian society, but the interplay of the two species sheds light on both and adds depth to the story.
The Ythrians first appear in the short story “Wings of Victory,” about humans' first encounter with them, in their native world. The humans are slow to recognize them as intelligent because they're so sure, on theoretical grounds, that flyers can't be intelligent. The relatively low gravity on Ythri makes it a little easier, but the real key to making flight possible for a body big enough to support intelligence is a “supercharger.” That's a mechanism by which wing motion can pump pressurized oxygen over surfaces where it can be absorbed directly into the bloodstream, supplementing that supplied by the lungs.
Anderson, justly renowned for his care in creating fully realized, multidimensional worlds, not only envisioned the mechanical solution, but worked out a detailed evolutionary history for the Ythrians. Their ancestors were analogous to our amphibians; the supercharger evolved from gills, while grasping talons became “hands.” The Ythrians could walk when they had to, on claws at the bends in their wings; but the air was their true home. The large energy requirements for flight, along with their breeding methods, have shaped virtually everything about their cultures. They must, for example, live in small groups with large territories; and their political institutions are looser and more individualistic than those of humans.
Anderson had already set many stories, the “Polesotechnic League” series, in a broad future history, and that provided a natural setup for the more extensive human interaction he wanted in The People of the Wind (which takes place centuries after “Wings of Victory”). Influenced by their early contacts with humans, Ythrians have also become spacefaring, though on a more modest scale. At a time of impending collapse of the Polesotechnic League, a group of humans move into an Ythrian-dominated region of space, and they and some Ythrians set up a joint colony on the planet Avalon.
The Polesotechnic League was succeeded by a much stronger Terran Empire, which eventually threatens the Ythrians—and the joint colony on Avalon. But that is no longer just a planet with humans here and Ythrians there; the two cultures have influenced each other to the extent that they are becoming a single hybrid culture. Naturally not everyone welcomes this. Elders of each species are concerned about the increasing tendency of their young to adopt ways and friends of the other.
The central story line of People is the war—Avalon against the encroaching Empire. But against that background Anderson weaves a rich tapestry of subplots involving individual interactions—human-human, Ythrian-Ythrian and human-Ythrian. And the human reader gets a very “inside” feel for what it is to be Ythrian, even unto a long and evocative poem distilling much of the essence of the Ythrian way of life.
The Kya
The principle of letting the interplay of two cultures or species illuminate both has been exploited, in a wide variety of ways, in many stories involving aliens and humans. In W.R. Thompson's kya series, humans and the kya, with their culture shaped by herbivorous herd-living ancestors, interact in a different set of ways in each story. There are quite a few of those stories now, but surprisingly enough, the author's original plan was for a single story, and the kya were not its primary focus.
The plot of the first story, “Maverick,” hinged on a different, ancient and extremely alien, group of aliens called the Nomads. Evolved in interstellar space, they had the disconcerting habit of imposing their will on other species and occasionally exterminating an entire planetful of beings who displeased them. Naturally humans felt a need to learn as much as they could about this potential threat, but virtually nothing was known about them except that they had left vaults on several planets containing what appeared to be extensive information—evidently intended to be found, but as yet undeciphered.
One of the nomad vaults was on the planet Kya. To get access to it, humans needed the cooperation of Kya's intelligent natives, the kya. The basic idea of the first story was simply that, because of the Nomad threat, human scientists had to deal with another species (the kya) and had trouble doing so because of their cultural differences. To make that kind of story work, the kya had to be similar enough to make mutual understanding seem easy, but just different enough to cause trouble.
With those constraints, Thompson (to whom I am grateful for sharing his memories of the process) set about creating the beings with whom his scientists had to deal. Their planet had to be fairly Earthlike, so neither species would have to spend all its time in spacesuits. Their biology had to be just different enough so humans and kya couldn't catch each other's diseases, which would create complications that would divert the story from its main thrust. But they had to be alien, with basic motivations different from ours, and a logical way to ensure that was to let them evolve from a different kind of ancestors.
Humans evolved from tribal apes, which has shaped our behavior and social institutions all the way up to the present. What might the kya evolve from, and how would their origins shape their societies? Thompson took his inspiration from watching two types of Earthly animals. Deer were the primary influence; watching a herd of them got him thinking about how typical herd behaviors might transform into civilization. In what may seem an odd juxtaposition, cats also made an important contribution. Their behavior is strongly influenced by an acute sense of smell. If intelligent beings had one, how would it affect their worldview and ways?
So Thompson started thinking, partly on paper, about what kind of society might develop among intelligent, herd-dwelling herbivores with a powerful sense of smell. It seemed likely that their social structures would be “tighter” than ours, with more tendency to act cooperatively and look out for their fellows' welfare, and less inclination to follow leaders who were not clearly acting in the herd's best interests.
Why would they evolve intelligence in the first place? It's often assumed that herbivores wouldn't, since, as the saying goes, it doesn't take many smarts to subdue a blade of grass. But that may be an oversimplification. Curiosity might evolve if the quality of grazing land varies considerably from place to place. And while catching grass doesn't require much cleverness, evading predators might, if the predators are such that such typical herbivore defenses as running away and reproducing in large numbers aren't enough.
How about the scent? Among cats and other animals that use it more than we do, it pervades all aspects of life—cats greet others by sniffing, and leave scents to mark objects and individuals as theirs. So, too, do the kya use a deep sniff as a polite greeting, and many of their figures of speech are based on scent.
Such is the evolutionary background of the kya. Thinking about its details and ramifications led to an even more vivid picture of the kya culture and how its members might react in various situations. Some of those details, such as the mutually puzzling behavior of humans and kya toward oddly acting individuals, helped generate the plot of “Maverick.”
But note carefully that the thinking in the culture-building stage was not directed primarily at, “What happens in 'Maverick?',” but rather at, “Who are the kya, how do they think and live, and how did they get that way?” When that kind of thinking gets going well, it typically generates many interesting ideas that have no place in the story you're working on, but suggest others. The Nomad problem that was the original driving force for “Maverick” is pretty well wrapped up in the second story, “Outlaw"; but the kya are still generating new stories based on some of the other ideas that came up in creating them. The kya game of bagdrag, for example (see also chapter six), was mentioned in passing in “Maverick,” but became a prime focus of the later story 'Touchdown, Touchdown, Rah, Rah, Rah!”
It's not really surprising that it is the kya, not the Nomads, who keep generating new stories. The Nomads are too alien for humans to relate to for very long; the kya are indeed “similar enough … but just different enough.”
Trimus
In G. David Nordley's “Trimus” stories, it's not obvious to the reader which came first—the unique planet Trimus, the deliberate attempt to create a society in which three very different species share it equally or the species themselves. All are so interrelated, and developed with such depth and subtlety, that the author could have started anywhere in the complex and must have gone through a great deal of back-and-forth to make it all fit together.
As it happens, I do know where it started and how it grew, because Mr. Nordley told me and kindly let me see some of his notes. And the answer is: none of the above. As so often happens in writing, a good story (or series) results not from the orderly development of a single germ of idea, but from the collision and interaction of two or more ideas. (Lesson to writers: Always be alert for sparks when two of your ideas get close together!)
Trimus actually started with the “Contact” conferences and newsletters (see References) and Nordley's thinking about the possibility that whales are intelligent. What, he wondered, would it be like to be an intelligent whale—and be harpooned? He began thinking about the possibility of a detective story involving a whalelike alien, probably the victim of a harpooning—but with an unusual twist. Instead of the old cliche of “monster” and/or victim discovered by humans, why not let the whale-like alien be the detective, and an authority figure?
An authority figure in what? Another part of Nordley's mind had been working in parallel on a line of thought that seemed independent: What would conditions be like on a planet that was really a tide-locked satellite of a brown dwarf, orbiting a larger and more “normal” star? (That would be necessary because the brown dwarf alone wouldn't be luminous enough to support life.) Such a world would have three distinct climatic zones that could support three kinds of life, each with a preferred zone but capable of visiting and interacting with others on their home turf. So Nordley conceived the idea of setting up an experiment in coexistence—a little like Anderson's Avalon, but even more so.
That, if the astronomical parameters were right, would provide an opportunity to have humans on the scene, which would help pull human readers into the story. And since Nordley's world, Trimus, offered three distinct zones, he might as well take full advantage of it by adding a third species to the mix.
The fact that humans were to be one of the species imposed some limitations on the astronomical background. Well-versed in the art of world-building, Nordley developed a detailed picture of Trimus and the solar system of which it is a part, choosing the parameters so that one portion of Trimus would be suitable for humans. If you read the stories (as I recommend), you'll easily recognize the Do'utians as the “whale-like aliens” in the original concept, though they've picked up some decidedly un-whale-like characteristics such as a repeatedly branched tongue that serves as a versatile manipulator. They're also amphibious rather than strictly aquatic. Nordley worked out much of their evolutionary and historical background on a world that would make them suited to another of Trimus's zones.
That left the third zone, which would be congenial to a race of flyers, the Kleth. To understand the Kleth, it was necessary to similarly work out their evolutionary background and the nature of their planet of origin. For each of the three species, filling in the whole picture required attention to such aspects of their societies as reproduction and language.
Each species included several different cultural groups within itself, and the ones who settled on Trimus tended to select themselves from particular subcultures. The goal on Trimus was to let each species retain its own identity and character, while cooperating with the others as parts of an integrated society. Making that possible required such things as agreeing on a measurement system and a language that could be used by all three species. Making that possible nudged the author's choices in certain directions.
Do'utian language, for example, is a little like the one I concocted for “Pinocchio,” using a broad sonic spectrum and sonic images. Kleth language is more like some human languages. They have a slightly lower but similar vocal range, and their language structure is highly symbolic, tonal, efficient and therefore terse. (They also have the ability to use their wings as sonic reflectors to hear over very large distances.) All of these characteristics are consistent with the anatomies and evolutionary backgrounds of the two species, but they didn't have to be exactly this way. Some of the details were chosen for literary convenience. The language skills of both Do'utians and Kleth include the ability to pronounce English, which, since it is the only one of the three languages usable by all three species, became the lingua franca of Trimus.
As with the kya, the original intent of all this background development was to provide a suitable setting for a single story. But the background generated so many interesting spin-off ideas that the temptation to use some of them in more stories was irresistible—especially when the first story was enthusiastically received by its readers.
HOW SHOULD YOU BEGIN?
There's no set formula for creating aliens and telling a story about them. It does seem that there are two basic approaches, depending on where the author's primary interest lies—or perhaps simply which aspect of a certain background occurred to him or her first. Sometimes the process starts with a general idea of the plot, and worlds and beings must be created to make it possible. Sometimes the world or the being is conceived first, and then beings must be developed to inhabit the world, or a world imagined to produce and accommodate the beings—and the story grows out of their natures.
In practice, it's probably quite rare for the development of any real story to follow either of those schemes in a pure, straightforward and simple way. Many writers will sometimes use one kind of starting point and sometimes the other. Once the process has begun, every decision about a new aspect of a story is likely to lead to rethinking and modification of other aspects that you thought you had nailed down. It's best not to become too attached to your original vision; sometimes its only value is to initiate a train of thought that ultimately goes somewhere else entirely. You shouldn't let it run out of control, but you should remain open to any new possibilities that suggest themselves. What matters is the end result: the published story that your readers see. You want that to be as good as it can be, so whatever method makes that happen is a right method.
