---

author: ["Tom Clancy"]
title: "GT07 Special Forces A Guided Tour of Us Army Special Forces - clan_9781101127421_oeb_c03_r1.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Tom Clancy - GT07 Special Forces A Guided Tour of Us Army Special Forces"
tags: ["force", "special", "sf", "soldier", "course", "student", "training", "candidate", "phase", "skill", "sfas", "one", "time", "team", "oda", "army", "day", "military", "mission", "like", "also", "personnel", "field", "exercise", "year"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/GT07SpecialForcesAGuidedTourofUsArmySpecialForces-clan9781101127421oebc03r1html

---


Special Forces
    Creating Special Forces Soldiers
    Eagles don’t flock. You have to find them one at a time!
    H. Ross Perot
    What kind of man undertakes a career where he can expect to spend up to six months a year away from home, where he is paid roughly half what his similarly qualified friends are making, where—if he is married—he is almost guaranteed a divorce, and where he has a pretty good chance of getting injured, wounded, or killed?
    Sound like an attractive profession?
    To a few ... To a precious few.
    The recruiters within Special Forces Command face the daunting challenge of identifying and training almost a thousand men every year who are not only unfazed by these challenges but are surpassingly capable in a breathtakingly large number of military and nonmilitary skills ... the Renaissance Men of the military. The task is a big one; and it has recently grown even bigger, as the combination of an exceptionally healthy civilian economy and extreme operations tempos (OpTempos) makes the lure of civilian life ever more attractive.
    It is not surprising that SFC has had a difficult time recruiting enough new SF soldiers to replace those who have retired or else have left the service for civilian jobs and more “normal” lives.21
    This leaves SFC with a difficult challenge: either reduce the standards for new recruits and accept a potentially less capable SF soldier, or hold the current high standards and hope that better recruiting will eventually turn the tide of attrition. Right now, SFC has chosen to maintain the highest possible standards, even if that means they are able to take on fewer missions. It is a lousy choice.
    So how would we describe their standards for selecting, recruiting, and training new SF soldiers? Well, it’s a little hard to do that.
    The official shoulder flash (emblem) of the John F. Kennedy (JFK) Special Warfare Center (SWC) and School
    OFFICIAL U.S. ARMY GRAPHIC
    For starters, it must be understood that the personnel assigned to U.S. Special Operations Forces are not simply highly trained soldiers, but special people given training that is not just specialized but extreme. It is this distinction that separates SOF personnel from conventional units assigned to unusual missions. A good example of the latter would include the B-25 bomber crews led by Jimmy Dolittle on the aerial raid on Japan in April 1942. These were selected from several line medium bomber units, given special training in Florida, then used on a one-time basis for the raid.
    At the same time, it’s clear from my conversations with folks in the organization that there is no such animal as an ideal Special Forces soldier ... or, for that matter, an ideal Special Forces recruit. And that may be the point. In diversity there is strength and depth. And that is exactly what folks like Colonel Remo Butler are looking for.
    Colonel Butler is commander of the 1st Special Forces Training Group—Airborne (1st SFTG [A]), a part of the much larger John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center (JFK SWC). The colonel, a most impressive human being (something like a cross between a college professor and a world-class athlete—he coaches boxing in his spare time), is very particular about the men who are allowed into the SF training program, and even pickier about those who survive to graduate. Along with his boss, Major General Kenneth R. Bowra (the commander of the JFK SWC), Butler has been leading the fight to hold onto the qualities that have made the individual SF soldier legendary.
    The organization where they work, the JFK SWC, is housed in two main buildings on the main post at Fort Bragg (Kennedy and Bryant Halls), as well as a host of subsidiary facilities across the country. It is the institutional keeper of all U.S. Army SOF knowledge, and it is responsible for a wide range of training, procurement, design, and development tasks for the entire Army SOF community (which, in addition to the Special Forces, includes the 75th Ranger Regiment, the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (SOAR), the Delta Force, and the various other units of USASOC). General Bowra and his staff control everything from a museum and archives to jump and SCUBA schools. Truly, if you want to know about Army SOF, you start at the JFK SWC.
    General Ken Bowra, USA, leads a party of dignitaries (including H. Ross Perot and Generals Shelton and Schoomaker) during a Fort Bragg dedication ceremony. General Bowra commands the John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center at Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
    JOHN D. GRESHAM
    Perhaps the biggest misconception about SOF units is that they are all brawn and combat skills and short on brains and judgment. “A Detachments” are not “Dirty Dozens,” as a visit to the JFK SWC will quickly demonstrate. Over the years I’ve visited scores of military schools in many countries, and none of them has the academic diversity and depth you find at the JFK SWC.
    So, just what kind of warriors are the Special Forces looking for?
        • Gender—Forget political correctness and the advancement of women. The existing Congressionally mandated Title 10 restrictions deny women the opportunity to serve in front-line infantry units, such as the Special Forces. Until that mandate is changed, the SF world will remain an all-male bastion.
        • Rank/Experience—The top leadership of the Special Forces likes its personnel to be older and more mature than the American military average. Thus, entry into SF is restricted to officers who are captains (O-3) or 1st lieutenants (O-2) already selected for captain. Enlisted personnel must either have reached the rank of specialist (promotable) E-4 and sergeants (E-5), or Special Forces recruits will usually be in their mid- to late twenties or early thirties—hopefully old enough to know what and when to do things, and perhaps more important, when not to.
        • Branch Experience—Though SF candidates are recruited from every branch of the Army, the majority of Special Forces recruits have come from a traditional pool of personnel within the Army’s infantry community—men who have risen from line infantry units to the 82nd Airborne Division, and then into a Ranger unit. However, since recent military drawdowns have been drying up this source, the SF leadership has had to cast a wider net, looking deeper into a greater variety of personnel skills and specialties. Today, an average Special Forces training class will include soldiers from the armor, signals, supply, and aviation branches, as well as the more traditional infantry career path. This trend has an upside: The personnel entering the teams have a broader than ever range of talents and skills, and these are proving valuable in the field on missions.
        • Physical Attributes—No, SOF personnel do not look like Arnold Schwarzeneg ger, Sylvester Stallone, or Jesse Ventura (though you will run into Chuck Norrises). Raw strength is not usually seen as a plus. In fact, Special Forces physical requirements are weighted more toward endurance and mental toughness. Sure, SF soldiers tend to be well muscled, shaped, and toned, but they are not taut hardbodies. In other words, they’re more like distance swimmers or triathletes than Nautilus nuts; and mental qualities are far more valuable than physical strength to future SF soldiers. More on this later.
        • Airborne Qualification—As mentioned earlier, the names of Special Forces units always include an “Airborne” designation. This means that everyone who aspires to the SF trade will either have successfully attended the Army Airborne School at Fort Benning, Georgia, or be prepared to do so prior to Special Forces Training. This course is a major hurdle in itself, one of the toughest obstacles to getting selected into SF training.
        • Language Skills—By the time a new SF soldier reaches his first team, he will have been assigned at least one foreign language to learn. Some of these are quite easy (like Spanish), while others might require more than a year of study (like Chinese or Arabic). On the other hand, candidates who are already proficient in one of the languages on the SF qualification list have an especially useful edge over other potential Special Forces candidates.
        • Racial/Ethnic Background—Over the years, the SOF community has had difficulty recruiting minority candidates. There are several reasons for this. For starters, there are simply far too few qualified minority candidates, while at the same time, the rest of the Army—not to mention the other military services, governmental agencies, and private industry—has proved to be especially attractive to those who are qualified. All the same, minority recruitment has become an increasingly important priority for the SF leadership, especially in light of the growing overseas commitments where a Hispanic, Slavic, Arabic, or Asian member might open doors that would remain closed to Anglo personnel.
    Since all of these items will be listed in any soldier’s personnel file, the first step in finding the men who will eventually become new SF soldiers will be a close look at the paperwork.
    But the clerical work is only a start. The real character traits that will qualify a recruit for Special Forces training are far deeper and harder to pin down than the qualities that find their way into personnel files. Let’s call the real traits “survival skills,” that is, those skills held by “survivor types.” Survivor types are the ones still standing after insanely tough or deadly encounters. They are the ones who will seize the opportunities available, steer through chaos, and win.
    How can you tell in advance who the survivor types are? You actually can’t with accuracy, because there is always an element of luck, but you can select for traits that survivors usually possess—and then hope.
    When I asked the trainers of the 1st SFTG to identify the chief of these traits, I kept hearing a single word—“agility.”
    Cats are agile, as are most animals in the wild. And most SF soldiers are agile in that sense. But they are also agile in senses that go far beyond mere animal grace and quickness. To better understand, let’s contrast agility with another term often used in military circles—“flexibility.” Flexibility is of course a good thing. It means you can adapt, change; it means you are not rigid or hidebound.
    But for the Special Forces, this is not enough. To be flexible, in their view, is to be reactive. It’s a way of responding to problems or situations rather than mastering them. On the other hand, agility, whether mental or physical, is a proactive quality. Those who have it have an edge in almost every kind of situation. In fact, to many SF personnel, their agility is their armor. With it they provide themselves with protection lacking in conventional Army units.
    Agile men are hard to find anywhere, but they are especially hard to find in the U.S. military, where the usual policy is to drive qualities like agility out of young soldiers, sailors, Marines, or airmen. The agile ones are seen as rebels, mavericks, or misfits, usually to the detriment of a long-term military career. And yet, such men are exactly the types that the Special Forces need.
    What are some of the other traits one can expect to find in a Special Forces soldier?
      • Military/Combat Experience—Because SF recruits will normally be 03/E-4, they will arrive with the benefit of from five to ten years of invaluable Army experience ... probably including deployed or combat duty (the Army has been very busy since the end of the Cold War). Anyone who has led troops will tell you that soldiers come in two flavors: those who have “seen the elephant” of combat and those who have not. Clearly, the combination of years of experience and a taste of combat is the best litmus for determining who will not freeze or hesitate in a critical situation.
      • Leadership—Leadership is an indefinable quality. Nevertheless, a few years of Army service tend to point out those who possess it. And for both officers and NCOs there are particular times when leadership qualities like initiative and self-motivation skills are most likely to appear. For officers, this time comes during their tours as platoon leaders. For NCOs, it most often comes when they serve as fire team and squad leaders or platoon sergeants.
      • Education—Special Forces leaders look for a solid knowledge base in each potential soldier, along with an indication that he wants to continue learning. Special Forces soldiers will not be academics, but they are intellectually curious: They are voracious readers; they soak up knowledge. Officers (who already possess a college degree when they enter the Army) will attend the staff and continuing education courses that are part of the normal Army career path, but they will also tend to find time for post-graduate programs. Enlisted personnel and warrant officers will work toward—and usually achieve—their own undergraduate or graduate degree. It’s also common to take additional night or continuing education courses.
      • Interpersonal Skills—Military officers and enlisted men are not famous for smooth, skilled interpersonal relations. And too often they are clumsy and abrupt enough to make civilians uncomfortable, threatened, or even hostile. Such an outcome is not an option to SF personnel if they are to successfully accomplish the range of overseas missions they’ll be called upon to do. If they are not already comfortable dealing with other people, other communities, other cultures, or other races, Special Forces soldiers have to learn how to do that. Not everyone has the temperament for that kind of openness, and that quality is closely monitored during the selection process.
      • Entrepreneurial Spirit—This is almost cognate with agility. The greatest entrepreneurs have vision. They’re adaptable. They take risks, but the risks more often than not pan out. They are alchemists, who can create a successful enterprise from nothing but raw ideas. They have incredible drive and energy. And they can focus the drive, energy, and ideas of others toward a desired outcome. Given the nature of Special Forces missions and the variety of circumstances they encounter, there is a pressing need for an entrepreneurial spirit within each SF soldier. The leadership, understandably, selects for it.
    Let me add a last, sobering observation to the above thoughts: During any given year, the number of candidates eligible for recruitment into the Special Forces is just a few thousand out of the more than one million soldiers (active, reserve, and National Guard) in the Army. Out of these few thousand, fewer than four hundred will successfully complete the journey to the awarding of the Green Beret.
Special Forces: The Mix
    All military units require a balanced mix of personnel whose skills are matched to their potential missions. Nowhere is this truer than in those small combat units that the Special Forces have designated as Operational Detachment Alphas (ODAs or “A” Detachments). The ODAs are the basic building blocks of the Special Forces. We’ll talk more about how these fit into the larger picture of SF organizations and missions later on, but right now I want to concentrate on how they are put together.
    Officially, each ODA is composed of twelve Special Forces soldiers. It is commanded by a captain (O-3), who is assisted by an assistant detachment commander, normally a warrant officer. They lead ten SF soldiers, whose skills cover six specific specialties, or technically, five Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) codes.
    Special Forces branch codes all begin with the number 18 (the number reserved for them in the Army system). These are broken down as follows:
        • 18A (Officer/ODA Commander)—The 18A branch code is reserved for Special Forces officers who will command ODAs on missions. 18As also provide the leadership for every other significant leadership position within the Special Forces community. Each ODA has one 18A assigned to it.
        • 180A (Warrant Officer/Assistant Detachment Commander)—To back up the 18A commanding the ODA, each A Team is assigned a 180A warrant officer to act as the assistant detachment commander.22-24 When the team operates together, he backs up the 18A and is prepared to take command in the event that the captain is absent or incapacitated. Also, should conditions or the mission dictate it, the ODA can be split into two equal teams, with the 18A and 180A each commanding one part.
        • 18B (Sergeant/Weapons)—The ODA 18Bs are the weapons specialists, and they are capable of operating and maintaining a wide variety of U.S., Allied, and other foreign weaponry. This includes not only personal weapons like the M4 carbine, M249 light machine gun, and M203 40mm grenade launcher, but also larger and more powerful weapons like the M2 .50-caliber machine gun, Javelin antitank missile, and mortars. 18Bs who have attended one of the Army’s two sniper courses can also act as snipers. Each ODA is normally assigned two 18Bs.
        • 18C (Sergeant/Engineering)—Since an ODA may be called upon to blow up a bridge one day, and then help rebuild it on another, each team is assigned two 18C engineering sergeants. 18Cs are specialists across a range of disciplines, from demolitions and construction of field fortifications, to topographic survey techniques. This means they are a significant force multiplier for planners in missions ranging from direct action strikes against enemy targets in wartime to humanitarian operations in time of crisis or natural disaster.
        • 18D (Sergeant/Medical NCO)—Since ODAs may have to operate behind the lines for months at a time, it is essential that each team have an organic medical capability. The two 18Ds who provide those services to each ODA are generally considered to be the finest first-response/trauma medical technicians in the world. Though primarily trained with an emphasis on trauma medicine, they also have a working knowledge of a range of skills such as dentistry, veterinary care, public sanitation, water quality, and optometry.
        • 18E (Sergeant/Communications NCO)—Another organic capability within each ODA is the ability to communicate back to base from virtually any point on Earth. A pair of 18Es provides these services. 18Es can operate every kind of commu-nicationsgear, from encrypted satellite communications systems to old-style high-frequency (HF) Morse key systems, but they also have serious computer/networking skills.
        • 18F (Assistant Operations/Intelligence NCO)—Since many ODA missions involve behind the lines activities in denied (i.e., hostile) territory, each ODA is assigned one 18F intelligence specialist. The 18F is fully qualified to collect and evaluate information for transmission back to higher headquarters, as well as to supply vital data on enemy units, targets, and capabilities. He will also provide the team with an interrogation capability should enemy prisoners be captured.
        • 18Z (Sergeant/Operations NCO)—Though shown on the organizational chart as an “operations planner,” the 18Z is actually the senior enlisted man in the team. Usually flagged as the “team sergeant,” the 18Z is responsible for making sure the entire team runs as a unit and is properly outfitted and supplied. While looking after the other sergeants on the team, he relieves the 18A and 180A of more mundane tasks, which allows them to concentrate on leading and planning missions for the ODA.
    A Special Forces engineering sergeant (18C) places a cutting charge of C4 plastic explosive on a steel I-beam during training. Along with demolition duties, 18Cs can also construct bridges and other useful items while on missions.
    JOHN D. GRESHAM
    ODAs are probably the finest and most capable light infantry units in the world, and they can conduct a variety of missions across the full spectrum of warfare and conflict.
    A Special Forces communications sergeant (18E) works on the networking gear for a large command post exercise, R-3. 18Es are among the most valued of military personnel for their extensive communications, encryption, and networking skills.
    JOHN D. GRESHAM
    There are, of course, downsides:
    Downside One: There are only about 6,500 combat-ready SF soldiers to go around at any time: about the same number as half of a single light infantry division.
    Downside Two: SF soldiers are expensive to train and support.
    Downside Three: They are frequently the targets of recruitment by civilian businesses. Companies who are looking for exactly that mix of technical skills and mental agility so prized by the Special Forces covet men from every one of the various 18-series MOS codes.
    Maintaining the organizational integrity of the Special Forces is a constant challenge.
Recruiting: The First Step
    How do they build these unique warriors?
    First, SF soldiers are not born. They have to be handcrafted one at a time by a time-tested process, which begins with the initial step of recruitment.
    Second, finding “the best of the best” is extremely difficult ... and not just because the sort of man with the necessary qualifications is a rare bird. All too often, the quiet professionalism of the Special Forces works against them. Because the Special Forces are not very good self-advertisers, potential recruits are often unaware what Special Forces can offer them ... or what they themselves can bring to Special Forces.
    The thin trickle of volunteers has left the staff of the 1st SFTG with a big job getting the word out about their community. Through a program of posters, newslet ters, and command magazines, the various Army SOF units try to educate potential candidates on the possible career paths open to them. Since the military overall already has such a wide variety of jobs and careers open to its personnel, this is tougher than it sounds. It’s not easy to persuade people to leave a branch or community after they have already invested as much as five or ten years in it.
    To help make those sales, a number of Special Forces recruiting teams make the rounds of Army posts around the world.23 These serve a dual mission: to inform soldiers that the Special Forces have openings and are recruiting, and to perform preliminary screening of possible SF candidates. Like any other recruiting detail, it is hard and terribly tedious work, and now that the total pool of Army personnel has been reduced by almost half from what it was a decade ago, while the number of SF soldiers needed to man the seven Special Forces Groups has not changed, it has become almost impossible.
    Still, the SFC recruiting teams manage to deliver a quality man to the 1st SFTG; the raw material for the Special Forces soldiers factory is as good as it has ever been ... and in some ways it may be even better. The move to recruit from branches other than the infantry has expanded the skill base of the entire SF community, and this has served them well in the post-Cold War world.
    Once a soldier has determined that he wants to join up, he volunteers.24 Assuming that he has met the necessary criteria and has completed his Jump School qualification, he can go into the queue for the next open spot in the Special Forces Assessment and Selection (SFAS) course.
Into the Fire: Special Forces Assessment and Selection
    At a minimum, a successful training evolution for a single SF soldier takes a full year, and costs a minimum of $100,000. It makes sense, therefore, to arrange for attrition to take place within the pool of potential recruits early in the training process, so as to minimize costs. This attrition is accomplished by means of the Special Forces Assessment and Selection (SFAS) course.
    Seven times a year, Company “G” of the 1st Battalion, 1st SFTG gathers SF candidates for SFAS at the Colonel Nick Rowe Special Forces Training Facility at Camp MacKall, North Carolina.25 Located in the sand hills west of Fort Bragg, Camp MacKall is a satellite facility adjacent to a number of range facilities used to train personnel from every part of the Army SOF community. Here every SF soldier’s career is born. At this humble location in the North Carolina pines, up to three hundred candidates (officers, warrant officers, and sergeants all together) are run through SFAS to determine their suitability to continue to the Special Forces Qualification Course (SFQC)—the “Q” Course.
    SFAS is twenty-four days of hell on earth; and it is probably the single biggest hurdle between a soldier and the Green Beret he will be awarded if he makes it to the end of the “Q” Course. Survivors of the SFAS test get an invitation to the SFQC. The alternatives are to return to their original Army service branch, or to try the SFAS again. Return to the original branch is not exactly an attractive choice, since it frequently leads to an early exit from the Army.26 But who in his right mind wants to go through the SFAS again?
    SFAS is designed to provide a raw test of body, mind, and soul that will allow the 1st SWTG staff to confidently send candidates forward, sure that they will be worth the money and effort that will be expended upon them during the “Q” Course. During those miserable twenty-four days, the candidates will suffer sleep deprivation, limited rations, and physical exertions bordering on the inhuman. At the same time, they will be required to demonstrate fieldcraft skills, mental toughness, and most of all, the refusal to give up. SFAS is not at all a builder or measure of qualities like intelligence, resourcefulness, or agility. It’s a straight-up, in-your-face test of an individual’s basic suitability for the Special Forces.
    Attrition is heavy. In one recent SFAS class, 7-99 (the final SFAS class of Fiscal Year 1999), 236 students started, and 78 successfully finished—an attrition rate of 67 percent. With dropout rates like this, it’s easy to understand the line from “The Ballad of the Green Berets”: “One hundred men will test today; but only three win the Green Beret!” By the time the entire recruitment, selection, and qualification process is done, three percent may actually be an overestimate.
    SFAS begins with up to three hundred candidates reporting to Camp MacKall. If they have been clever, they will have taken the advice of their SF recruiter to get into a regular physical fitness regime before they come. For most, this involves lots of distance walking with heavy loads in a rucksack. But swimming skills are even more important, since the ability to stay afloat and move in water is a requirement for all SF personnel, and the swim test often ends prospective Special Forces careers. By the way, wood chopping is an excellent preparation for the swim test, an SFAS instructor explained to me, since it builds upper body muscles.
    Another problem for SFAS candidates is that the course is never the same. In order to prevent potential SF soldiers from “figuring out” the course and outsmarting the instructors, events and goals are constantly changed from class to class. For example, though distance marches with loaded packs are a staple item in SFAS life, the actual distances vary,27 and many times the students are not told how far they will go on a particular march, only that they will carry a weighted rucksack (the weight varies, but usually is over 50 lb./22.67 kg.) until the instructors tell them to stop. These marches are run in all sorts of conditions, from the humid heat of summer to the ice storms of winter.
    Along with their other skills, all Special Forces soldiers are fully jump qualified prior to attending their qualification course. These soldiers are practicing parachute and water infiltration skills, which are organic to each Special Forces Group.
    OFFICIAL U.S. AAMY PHOTO
    To make life even more interesting, the students gradually have their sleep patterns and sleep periods altered, so that they are rapidly sleep deprived.
    Meanwhile, the SFAS staff packs a lot into the twenty-four days:
        • Obstacle Courses—SFAS has a good one. It incorporates a variety of barriers from walls and jumps to climbing ropes and underground sewer pipes. This course not only provides the SFAS cadre with a means to evaluate the overall physical fitness of the candidates, it lets them note specific shortcomings, such as fear of heights, inability to climb, or claustrophobia. All of these are important to know early, as any one of them can make a soldier worthless to SFC teams in the field.
        • Runs—While much of the military has taken the view that high-impact aerobic activities like running can be bad (with good reason—it’s hell on joints), the Special Forces take the view that their entire profession is “high impact,” and Special Forces soldiers simply have to deal with it. Since SFAS aims to shake and rattle an SF candidate within an inch of his life, medium distance runs are an excellent way to start the day.
        • Marches—Dozens of marches with packs are conducted during the twenty-four days of the course. All are designed to wear down a candidate to the point of mental and physical exhaustion.
        • Land Navigation/Fietdcraft—Along with physical and mental stamina, there is no other skill so vital to a Special Forces soldier as land navigation. While most Army units take it for granted that they will have a NAVSTAR Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver and satellite photo-based maps, SF units are expected to maneuver to pinpoint, time-on-target objectives with nothing more than a compass, protractor, and map. Just to make things interesting, they must also do it in the dark and bad weather. Remember that batteries run down and electronics break, yet the magnetic field of planet Earth has proven comfortingly reliable. Though SFAS candidates go through a whole series of exercises on the ranges around Camp MacKall, this fixation on navigational skills is continued during the “Q” Course.
        • “Situation and Reaction”—These exercises take students who are already sleep deprived and on the edge of a physical collapse and test their problem-solving skills in a real-world situation. They are faced with a problem that is only a half a degree of separation from absurd. Then using simple materials supplied by the staff or by nature, they must find a way to solve it. Over the years, the SFAS staff has devised dozens of these “Situation and Reaction” situations, so that particular events are rarely repeated in a given year.
          For example, imagine a 5,000-lb./2,267-kg. M151 jeep with a wheel missing. Now consider how a group of ten SFAS candidates might use only poles and ropes to move the crippled vehicle, along with a load of water cans, a mile or two.
          One of the more creative solutions involves removing a wheel, leaving only two on opposing comers, and then running poles across the hood and rear bed and tying them down with ropes. Next, the water cans and everybody’s packs are loaded onto the jeep, along with a (preferably light) soldier to steer. Two other soldiers balance the vehicle with the poles, while the other seven push. This really works!
        • Team Events—Though SFAS is a highly personal event for an individual soldier, a few team-oriented events allow the cadre to evaluate a candidate’s ability to work with others. These are normally variations on “Situation and Reaction”-type events, and have similar goals.
          For example, consider a wooden box with rope handles, about 3-ft./1-m. long, weighing about 60 lb./27.2 kg. loaded, and containing 5.56mm rifle ammunition. Such boxes are generally considered miserable to move more than a few hundred yards/meters (after that, the rope handles start cutting into the carrier’s hands). Now, imagine a twelve-man squad of SFAS students toting their weighted field packs having to move four or five of these containers several miles.
          To begin with, putting a pair of SFAS candidates on each will not do (because of the rope handles problem). And there is the further problem that the weight of the boxes is sufficient to require that now and again the carriers will have to be relieved. Clearly, the job will take a concerted team effort.
          I saw a number of solutions: One was to build a rope and pole platform that could be rested on the packs of six marching candidates. They would then trade off every few hundred yards/meters. Another team had a volleyball-style rotation, with eight or ten candidates carrying, while the other two walked behind and “rested.”
    Special Forces applicants endure the agonies of the ammo box carry during a Special Forces Assessment and Selection course. Survival of this endurance contest is needed to move on to the Special Forces Qualification Course.
    JOHN D. GRESHAM
    Special Forces candidates carry a log in a “Situation and Reaction” exercise. Such exercises are used during Special Forces Assessment and Selection courses to help identify those with the aptitude and physical qualities necessary for life in the teams.
    JOHN D. GRESHAM
    Since SFAS events are designed to eliminate SF candidates who do not have the “right stuff” to move on to the “Q” Course, the whole thing must be, in all honesty, brutal. This is by no means a judgment on anyone’s personal or “human” qualities (Mother Teresas need not apply). You are evaluated purely on your performance.
    For that reason, SFAS cadre personnel avoid sympathetic reactions or evaluations; and they do not get to know the students. The entire SFAS cadre is fully aware that in a year or two, one of these candidates could be in the field on a mission with them. Who do you want at your side when your life hangs in the balance? Much like the Navy’s famous TOPGUN school for fighter pilots, “There are no points for second place.”
    The vast majority of SFAS attrition takes place during the second week, during which time the class will be trimmed to about half its starting size. Most will drop out on marches or during training events. A candidate will hit a “wall,” much like marathon runners during the twenty-first mile of a race. Something breaks inside, and he will raise a hand to call a cadre member, who quickly takes him aside to minimize the shock and shame. Though this is hardly a shameful failure (anyone with courage enough even to try SFAS is a special kind of human being, and should be admired for it), the prospect of returning home is always a tough one.
    Sometimes the SFAS cadre will see someone who is simply not physically or mentally up to the challenge. They will then either counsel the candidate to drop out, or else just fail him on their own. Other times an otherwise qualified candidate suffers an injury during the course, which presents the SFAS staff with a difficult problem.
    There are several ways to deal with it. If the injury is minor (say a stress fracture or a pulled muscle or tendon), then the candidate will probably be given a chance to heal and try again in the following SFAS class. Should the problem be more serious, the staff may send the candidate back to his home base to heal and (if he’s willing) get himself ready for another try the following year. If the injury is even more serious, he will have to be dropped, and advised not to return. Though these last losses are heartbreaking, the good news is that many of the injured candidates choose to try SFAS again. Such men are exactly the kind of people that the Special Forces want—men who would rather die trying than fail. These “retread” candidates have an extremely good completion rate.
    By the end of the third week of SFAS, most failures and dropouts will have taken place, and the survivors are starting to think ahead to entering the “Q” Course. However, nobody should assume he will finish SFAS without going through every wicket thrown up by the cadre. For example, the land navigation portion of the course frequently causes problems even for experienced infantrymen, and can cause a “drop” just as easily as an injury. Nothing at SFAS is easy, and none of the students knows until the last day if they have made it or not.
    A Special Forces Assessment and Selection candidate just after falling out of a march—deciding to drop out. While such moments are heartbreaking, they help ensure the extremely high quality of every Special Forces soldier.
    JOHN D. GRESHAM
    Finally, on day twenty-four, the tests come to an end, and the successful candidates will begin to look forward to what is to come. There are no fancy graduation ceremonies or presentations. SFAS is about survival, pure and simple. But there is a prize: an invitation to the Special Forces Qualification Course.
    Unfortunately, the SF candidates don’t just finish up SFAS and head into the “Q” Course. Usually, the candidates must wait for a while between the end of one and the start of the other (and the wait can be as long as a year). This is a good time to take some leave, or possibly a military school course, and, of course, they are expected to stay in top physical condition.
    Longer waiting periods have to be dealt with back at the soldier’s home base, which can be an uncomfortable time (not a few candidates will undergo some harassment from their conventional force brethren). While nobody in SFC or the rest of the Army cares to say it, the wait leaves candidates in a limbo, between their old and new lives.
The Special Forces Qualification Course
    SFAS does not make a Special Forces soldier. Surviving SFAS merely shows an aptitude to become an SF soldier. Actuating that potential requires a lot more training and persistence. The “Q” Course takes a qualified and experienced soldier and turns him into a basically trained Special Forces soldier, ready to join a team in one of the SFGs and head “downrange” on missions.
    The SFQC functions as a graduate-level training course, providing everyone who completes it with a common set of skills and experiences to take with them into their teams. At the same time it provides a final filtering element that allows the Special Forces community to confirm that a soldier is both ready and worthy for the responsibilities ahead.
    Today’s “Q” Course essentially follows the syllabus laid out a half-century ago by Colonel Bank and his original 10th Special Forces Group (SFG) cadre. Run in three parts (or phases), SFQC is designed to give each SF candidate not only the field and combat skills he will need, but also the technical and professional training to fulfill his particular MOS code. The three phases are broken down this way:
        • Phase I—Centering on basic skills training, Phase I is thirty-nine days long and is designed to provide a common level of field skills for all participants, no matter which branch they may come from.
        • Phase II—In Phase II the group is broken up according to the students’ various MOS specialties, and it varies in length depending upon the technical skills code assigned to a particular soldier.
        • Phase III—During Phase III, students are familiarized with their core mission: unconventional warfare ... the “muscle” end of the Special Forces trade. Thirty-eight days long, Phase III culminates in a large-scale field exercise, known as Robin Sage.
    Four courses are run each year. But because of the varying lengths for Phase II training, most students wind up finishing Phase III with a different group of students than they started with. Since many SF missions involve “pickup” teams thrown together at the last minute, this inconsistency is probably an aid to training and not a hindrance. Every part of SFQC is designed to mimic the real-world situations that SF troops will inevitably encounter in the field.
The “Q” Course: Phase I
    The goals and objectives of Phase I of the SFQC are fairly simple: A soldier who successfully completes this part of the course will be ready to plan, conduct, and lead a squad-sized patrol, accurately navigating cross-country movements with a full combat load to a planned schedule in darkness and bad weather.
    While these skills may seem basic, you’d be surprised how few soldiers around the world can actually run such an operation. To the leadership of most armies it is virtually inconceivable that every member of a squad or platoon (the equivalent of a Special Forces ODA) could bring it off. At SFQC such an accomplishment is only a “passing” grade.
    For most students, the “Q” Course begins with a return to Camp MacKall and the Rowe Training Facility, where they endured the SFAS. However, whatever the memories they may have of the SFAS (usually unpleasant), there is a basic difference between the SFQC and SFAS. Though failures and dropouts will still happen, at the SFQC the cadre will do everything they can to help the SFQC students win their Green Berets at the end of Phase III.
    A member of the Special Forces Assessment and Selection cadre at Camp MacKall, North Carolina. Such Special Forces professionals are the keepers of their almost tribal knowledge, and ensure that every new soldier they mint is as good as those who have come before.
    JOHN D. GRESHAM
    The instructors are drawn from Company “F” of the 1st Battalion/1st SWTG, who also run Phase III and some elements of the Phase II training.
    From the moment a student arrives, every hour of each day is carefully scheduled for maximum training value. The focus is on building a common set of field and combat skills, no matter what a soldier’s background or previous service specialty may be. Phase I levels the playing field of skills, and prepares the students for what follows.
    So for example, to folks from branches like armor or logistics, much of what they learn there is brand-new, while infantrymen who have gone through Ranger training probably have much of the Phase I curriculum down cold, and for them it is a refresher course. But—and this is a big but—they are expected to mentor those from other communities, and are judged on how well they do this.
    The table below lays out the entire thirty-nine days of Phase I:
    Not surprisingly, Phase I begins with a heavy dose of land navigation—a continuation of the skills that they demonstrated during SFAS. The exercises are designed to make the students confident of their movement skills under any conditions imaginable; and they must do this without GPS receivers.
    Obviously, every SF ODA deploys with GPS navigation gear, and they are trained to use it capably. However, batteries run down and satellites can be disabled by solar storms or enemy action. A compass and paper map always work. Therefore, the SFQC makes certain that these are a SF candidate’s primary navigation tools.
    Actually, proficiency at manual land navigation is not terribly difficult. It just takes preparation time and practice.
    For starters, each student must discover exactly how long his stride is. This is done on a measured course, either fifty or a hundred meters long. (Because metric measurements are the standard in civilized countries, and maps everywhere are always drawn in metric measures, the U.S. military has gone metric. The old imperial measures used by the rest of Americans are now Neanderthal ... though I have to confess that I still find comfort in them.)
    Usually the students measure their stride (one step with each leg) over several kinds of terrain, so they can bias their measurements accordingly. Let’s say a student measures sixty strides per hundred meters, and this is fairly constant over most kinds of terrain and tactical movement. He can then calculate distance traveled fairly easily. And to make this easier, he is encouraged to use “Ranger beads,” a sort of field abacus that can be hung from his uniform blouse. (Ranger beads don’t crash; they have no batteries to fail; and they work in the dark in any weather.)
    Once a student can reliably measure distance, his next problem is to make sure he is going in the right direction. This is done by means of what is called “point to point” movement: The student figures a base course from the start point to the objective. But, if necessary, the journey can be broken into smaller legs to accommodate difficult terrain or covert movement. The student then calculates a bearing from “point to point,” and proceeds on his way. The trick to staying on course is to take bearings on significant terrain features (trees, rocks, poles, etc.), and move between them. By regularly checking his bearings, tracking the distance with his beads, and looking for intermediate calibration points shown on the map (road junctions, buildings, etc.), the student should be able to move quite accurately.
    Following land navigation training, the trainees move on to a four-day course in common soldier tasks (marksmanship, first aid, etc.), along with fieldcraft skills (which are not all that different from what you might encounter at a good Boy Scout summer camp).
    This training is followed by a week of learning patrolling and other soldier skills. Tactical movement and observation skills are emphasized, but there is also additional weapons training. By the end of the third week of Phase I, the students are ready to move into a series of more complex skills training and exercises.
    Week four of Phase I begins with a three-day introduction to the art of ambushes and field reconnaissance. These bread-and-butter SF missions begin to give the trainees an idea of what they will be in for if and when they move on to an SF ODA.
    This is followed by a week of field exercises, where the lessons of the previous twenty-four days are put to practical use. The students are broken into six-man squads, and sent out into the countryside around Camp MacKall to conduct simulated ambushes, reconnaissance missions, and other assorted tasks. During this period the instructors get their first real look at how individual students function in the field, and how they interact with team members. Those who clearly do not meet the required performance standards will be dropped (or sometimes counseled to recycle and try again later).
    Just as at SFAS, injuries can cause unwanted problems, but the instructors try to nurse the injured along to the extent that is possible. If it is not, the injured candidate is evacuated to the medical facilities at Fort Bragg for treatment, and perhaps a chance to try again during another SFQC session. Generally, a student can take two tries at the “Q” Course.
    Day thirty-two begins a two-day session on platoon operations, which is then followed by another five-day field exercise. This time, twelve-man platoons/ODAs are sent out into the forests and fields to run various kinds of missions. Once again, the Phase I cadre can judge whether or not candidates are ready to move on to Phase II training. This is a critical moment, because the really difficult and expensive part of a SF soldier’s training begins in Phase II, and the cadre wants to make sure that only qualified students go further.
    The students spend Day 39 doing paperwork and outprocessing, getting ready to head into Phase II.
The “Q” Course: Phase II
    Once Phase I is completed, each Special Forces trainee will begin to train for his own unique MOS specialty code, often at facilities other than Fort Bragg or Camp MacKall. For example, the 18Es (communications sergeants) do much of their training at Camp Gruber, Oklahoma, while the 18Ds (medical sergeants) perform trauma room rotations in hospitals located in New York City and Tampa, Florida. In all, eight separate 18-series courses are run for Phase II training, varying in length from six to twelve months.
    The courses break out this way:28
      • 18A (Officer)—Run by Company “A” of the 1st Batallion/1st SWTG (A), this course is six months long. The 18A course is designed to take officers from con-ventionalline Army units and turn them into leaders capable of running an ODA in the field thousands of miles from home base. During the 18A course, the students get a heavy dose of unconventional warfare (UW) training, with a particular emphasis on mission planning and logistics. There is also a great deal of academic work, focused specifically on guerrilla warfare and insurgency operations.
      • 18B (Weapons Sergeant)—Company “B” of the 1st Batallion/1st SWTG (A) runs the course for weapons sergeants, which is designed to teach advanced weapons skills for a wide variety of ordnance. An 18B candidate is expected to learn how to operate and maintain every kind of weapon from pistols to rocket launchers. And not only U.S. and Allied weapons, but also firearms from around the world.
      • 18C (Engineering Sergeant)—Also run by Company “B” of the 1st Batallion/1st SWTG (A), the 18C Phase II training (at Camp MacKall) is simply a course in how to build things, and then blow them up. This seemingly odd combination of skills actually makes a lot of sense for those who may have to build a dam one day on a peacekeeping mission, and then blow up a bridge in combat on another.
      • 18D (Medical Sergeant)—The longest of the Phase II training courses (at twelve months), the medical sergeant’s course is run by the Special Operations Medical Training Battalion at Fort Bragg (which also trains combat medics for the Rangers, Navy SEALs, and others), and it is quite simply the finest first-response medical training in the world. One reason for this is the emphasis on quick response to trauma, especially gunshot wounds. To give the student 18Ds the necessary experience, each candidate conducts rotations at innercity hospitals in the Bronx and Tampa.
      • 18E (Communications Sergeant)—SF operations make a lot of demands upon communications—the responsibility of the 18E. Trained by Company “E” of the 1st Batallion/1st SWTG (A) at Camp Gruber, Oklahoma (an Army National Guard post), the SF 18Es are among the most talented and skilled communications personnel in the world. Their six-month course covers everything from basic Morse code training to advanced computer networking and encryption techniques. These are “shade-tree” radio operators, who can design and string homemade wire antennas one day and install computer network routers the next.
    Special Forces officer candidates attend an operations planning lecture during Phase II of their qualification course. The “Q” Course has a heavy academic component, which prepares young officers and noncommissioned officers for duty in the field.
    JOHN D. GRESHAM
    This set of courses is the distinguishing element that sets the Special Forces apart from other SOF communities. Here SF candidates learn not only their particular MOS skills, but also the key principles of UW, such as combat tactics and warfare abilities, and also noncombat and political principles. Because they carry both an olive branch and a gun in their rucksack of skills, SF soldiers can cover a much broader spectrum of warfare than any other SOF community in the U.S. military. This is another component of their “agility.”
    One of the more interesting challenges in Phase II is to work the “conventional” Army mentality out of candidates. What do I mean by that? Though many of my friends in the Army will disagree with me, let’s say that in its conventional manifestation it is big, slow, ponderous, resistant to change, resistant to innovation, dogmatic, bureaucratic, closeminded... “Mother.” For many, leaping out of the lap of Mother Army is far from easy, so deeply imbedded are the Pavlovian responses learned during their years of service in “the big green machine.”
    One sharp-looking and obviously talented young captain from the armor community showed me how hard it can be. During a map exercise with other 18A candidates, he proceeded to break a simulated operational area into squares (which is the way the “regular” Army does things), with no consideration of the nature of the terrain or of the various groups that might have to operate on it. The Army likes lines and grids; UW is nonlinear. The young captain clearly had trouble with the nonlinear nature of unconventional warfare, and the Phase II cadre criticism hit him so hard that he visibly sagged.
    But he learned. His second try was better: He broke the zones by roads, streams, and county boundaries. Later he learned to draw his demarcation lines along impassable or difficult terrain, since these are rarely in dispute between guerrilla bands and military units.
    The 18-series Phase II training also includes a heavy dose of teaching skills, since so much of a SF soldier’s time downrange will be spent on training foreign military personnel. There is also an additional dose of cross-cultural skills training, so the students will be ready for their next challenge: Phase III and the Robin Sage field exercise.
The “Q” Course: Phase III
    The home stretch of the “Q” Course starts with the beginning of Phase III, which is the advanced training portion of the SFQC, and which concludes with a large-scale final examination known as Robin Sage. At only thirty-eight days long, Phase III is the most concentrated part of the course, and the final chance for the training cadre to evaluate a student prior to certification as a Special Forces soldier. The course schedule is broken out in the table below:
    Over half of Phase III is dedicated to the preparations for and the running of Robin Sage, which probably gives you some idea of how much weight the SFQC cadre places on it. Robin Sage ties everything together, and shows once and for all whether or not a student really has the “right stuff” for the Special Forces trade.
    Phase III begins with a day of inprocessing and issuing equipment. At the same time, the students are grouped into student SF ODAs, where they will operate for the rest of Phase III (after days two and three).
    On days two and three, officers are lectured on Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield (IPB—a fancy military term for getting the lay of the land and sizing up possible opponents and targets), while the sergeants learn about mission and operations planning.
    Then the students are given refresher training on air, helicopter, and parachute operations and procedures, in preparation for a series of field exercises.
    Days seven to ten are used to indoctrinate the student ODAs into the SF practice of premission isolation for planning, training, and packing. Going into ISOFAC (short for Isolation Facility) is one of the cornerstones of SF combat operations, and is drilled hard into the minds of the new SF candidates. The idea is to isolate the SF ODA personnel, so that they can plan their missions with a minimum of outside influence and interference.
    Their first chance to try out their new planning skills is on an airborne (parachute) field exercise, which is run on day eleven. This acts as a refresher jump for those who may be out of practice, and gets everyone ready for the Robin Sage insertion two weeks later.
    The jump exercise is followed by the last four days of academic instruction, which covers UW and cross-cultural communications skills.
    Day sixteen begins the run-up to Robin Sage. Each ODA is given a simulated set of tasks that must be accomplished during the exercise. The teams then go into ISOFAC, and begin to run their planning and preparations. This includes a series of rehearsals on days twenty-one and twenty-two, as well as evaluations of planning and proposed courses of action by the Phase III cadre.
    Once all the preparations are completed, it is time for the “Q” Course’s final examination: Robin Sage.
Final Exam: Robin Sage
    In military circles the rule is that if you train for the most difficult and dangerous kind of combat operation, you can probably handle the operations that are easier than that. This is the working philosophy behind the final Phase III field exercise, which is designed to test everything the candidates have been taught in their Army careers. The exercise also has some history behind it: Robin Sage attempts to simulate the missions of the World War II Jedburgh teams that were dropped into Europe by the OSS prior to the D-Day invasion in 1944. On the ground, these teams linked up with local resistance bands and partisans, and helped them to fight the Axis forces.... Extremely difficult and dangerous missions.
    Such missions still represent the most difficult tasks that SF ODAs might be assigned to accomplish, and they are a unique training challenge that is not practiced anywhere else in the U.S. military.
    To the north and west of Fort Bragg and Camp MacKall lies the vast rural area of North Carolina’s sand hills (which is mostly made up of farms and retirement/ vacation communities). The people here not only support their military neighbors, they actually love to take part in the exercises. So much so that many of them offer their time and land at no charge to help the Special Forces practice their trade. By enlisting hundreds of these patriotic Americans, the staff of the SFQC can vastly expand their normal training ranges during Robin Sage, and has free rein over the imaginary nation they call “Pineland”29 (a number of counties in the Uwharrie Forrest, totaling several hundred square miles), where bands of resistance fighters are trying to overcome an oppressive government. As an added bonus, the local residents have formed a loose association known as the “Pineland Auxiliary,” which supplies civilian roleplayers to augment military personnel who run the exercises.
    Robin Sage is the largest and (despite the unpaid help of local residents) most expensive continuing exercise run by the Special Forces. (They have run this, or very similar, exercises for more than forty years.) Each of the four Robin Sage events run each year requires several hundred SF soldiers from the 1st SWTG (A) and active groups, and these will have to assemble and operate in the field for several weeks at a time. There are also enormous expenditures by Air Force and Army aviation units in order to support simulated infiltration and resupply missions throughout the exercise.
    The scenario of Robin Sage is actually quite simple. The Phase III staff prepares up to a dozen twelve-student ODA teams. Each is assigned an insurgent group within Pineland for link up and support. The student ODAs are then infiltrated into Pineland by land, air, or water, after which they march to safe meeting places with the guerrilla groups (called “G Bands”). The ODA’s job is to integrate into the insurgent organizations, build a rapport with the guerrilla leadership, and attempt to organize them into more effective military units. It will also assist the insurgent bands in striking at enemy targets within Pineland, in anticipation of a future liberation by Allied forces.
    Each Robin Sage simulates a seventy-five day campaign, but this is compressed into an exercise timeframe of fifteen days.
    All of this action requires a great deal of supervision and observation, and the Phase III cadre stays busy making sure things run smoothly. Each student SF ODA has an observer/controller (O/C) assigned to monitor its actions, and provide advice and guidance when it is needed. Other O/Cs assess combat drills, the meetings with guerrilla bands, and almost everything else that a dozen men might do in two weeks of field activity.
    Every Robin Sage begins with a forced entry into “Occupied Pineland,” and it is run exactly as it would be in combat. Many teams will ride into the exercise area by air. Some may then parachute down from an Air Force C-130 or C-141 transport. Others may ride one of the Army’s 160th SOAR MH-47 or MH-60 special operations helicopters. But to make things more interesting, the Phase III cadre will often switch delivery methods at the last minute in order to create what the Prussian military philosopher Clausewitz called friction—the inevitable messes, confusions, hang-ups, and breakdowns in real-world combat operations that cause plans to come unraveled and schedules to grind to a halt. A major objective of Robin Sage is to view how the students deal with “friction.” How they manage it is a good test of agility. The ones who possess agility will find ways to overcome or bypass friction. They are worth their weight in gold. The ones who constantly get bogged down may not have the temperament for the Special Forces.
    Robin Sage traditionally begins on a Saturday night, a few hours before midnight with between ten and twelve student ODAs fanning out across central North Carolina.
    The night I watched a Phase III group head out, six teams were going to be dropped by parachute from two C-130s, and four more were to be delivered by 160th SOAR MH-47s and MH-60s. As they trundled toward their aircraft, every man was carrying a full combat load of weapons and ammunition, together with enough rations for five days without resupply. Average pack weight was between 100 and 125 lb./ 45 and 57 kg. Those carrying parachutes had another 50 lb./23 kg. and literally waddled out to the C-130s. At around 2100 hours, the aircraft and helicopters began to lift off, and over the next several hours, the skies over resorts like Pinehurst and manufacturing towns like Dunkirk droned with the sounds of turboprops and rotor blades.
    Once student ODAs hit the ground, their first order of business is a tactical movement off of the landing zone and assembly at a rally point to count heads and get themselves aligned. This is another chance for the cadre to apply “friction,” and occasionally a team is diverted away from their planned drop or landing zone. This requires a quick adjustment, since teams of Opposing Force (OpFor) troops are out there trying to capture or “kill” them.
    Most of what’s left of the first night will be spent marching to a link-up point, where the teams will meet representatives of the guerrilla band they are assigned to work with. Along the way, they will find a safe place to hide the bulk of their ammunition, food, and explosives, and bury it in what is called a cache.
    I need to note here that the guerrillas they will meet are not “nice” or “well-behaved” people, and they are not necessarily eager to experience the benefits of democracy or the American way of life. In other words, they will have their own agenda—primarily to get rid of the bastards who run their country. There is no guarantee that they themselves will not also be bastards. The ODAs will not have an easy time of it.
    The leader of the guerrilla band (called a “G” Chief) is an experienced SF officer, selected for his ability to role-play a local rural warlord. A mixed team of SF personnel and 82nd Airborne Division/XVIII backs up the “G” Chief and acts as guerrilla role players in his band. Their job in general is to act as provocateurs. But specifically, it is to obtain supplies and weapons from the ODA with no strings attached. That is, without any commitment in return. The goal of the ODA captain is to negotiate with the “G” Chief and persuade him to allow the student team into the camp to train and professionalize his band.
    The problems usually begin when the student ODA team arrives at the “G” camp, attempts to make contact, and finds that their training and instructions have not prepared them for what they encounter.
    The student SF ODA captain will attempt to introduce himself and his team, but finds that the “G” Chief does not treat them like saviors. In fact, they are kept at arm’s length. The next few hours are normally tense and unpleasant for the SF candidates. First the “G” Chief will make it very clear that he is the one in charge around here, they do not count for much in his scheme of things, and he has nothing but contempt for the U.S. military in general and for them in particular.
    Since their mission specifically orders them to build rapport with the band, the student SF ODA members just have to take all this. Thus, the ODA captain must patiently listen and wait until (hopefully) an opening appears that will allow him to explain how they will give the guerrillas something far more valuable than weapons, and can make the guerrilla band stronger and more effective.
    Even if that point does get made, the sparnng between the “G” Chief and student ODA members will likely go on for days. Establishing credibility and trust takes time. And the rural freedom fighters are far from achieving sanctity. Sometimes they will try to steal ammunition, food, and weapons from the students (or cheat them out of them). Other times, an ODA gaff, misstep, or cultural insensitivity will sit very badly with the guerrillas, and chill the relationship, which will then have to be patiently renegotiated. In some cases things go badly enough that the team’s attached O/C may coach the students to get them back on track.
    The “G” Chief of a simulated guerrilla band during Robin Sage. Such roles are played by experienced Special Forces soldiers, and provide a realistic final examination for the “Q” Course.
    JOHN D. GRESHAM
    At some point during the opening days of the exercise, the student ODA captain and team sergeant will be taken to a meeting with the guerrilla chief of the whole region, who is usually played by a member of the Pineland Auxiliary. There the ODA captain is expected to speak in general about U.S. policy toward Pineland, and specifically about how he plans to help the resistance forces. Predictably, these meetings do not turn out to be a piece of cake for the young captains. Tempers flare, tough, demanding words fly; it’s all very confrontational ... and there is always the possibility of further deterioration in ODA-guerrilla relations. Or worse.
    The rapport-building phase of Robin Sage lasts until D+3, at which point the scenario jumps forward thirty days in simulated time. The table below shows how the next events break out:
    The second part of Robin Sage opens on D+4. The ODA members will now teach the guerrillas important military skills, like weapons and demolitions training and field medical procedures. But the training is not limited to strictly operational subjects. For example, the student SF soldiers will also teach the guerrillas the rudiments of the laws of war, and at some point they will try to sign them into the Free Pineland Army (which means, practically, that the guerrillas can be “paid,” and will have “service records”). This last is no small matter. In many countries their service may well be rewarded with pensions and decorations (if the freedom fighters win).
    Teaching the guerrillas the laws of war is also hugely practical, for they are not normally observed in the kinds of insurrections and unconventional wars fought by guerrillas. And this means that our young ODAs will have still more bad problems to handle. Acts in combat that would normally be considered “war crimes” or “atrocities” are just the ways things are done in the less-developed regions of the world. The student ODA will frequently be faced with a situation that may or may not be a war crime. They will have to evaluate the situation, try to decide if it is a crime, and then figure out some way to resolve the situation without wrecking the rapport they have built with the “G” Band. It can (and should) be a tough judgment call.
    The second phase of Robin Sage ends on D-7 (day thirty-seven in simulated time), with a combined ODA/“G” Band raid or ambush on OpFor forces (drawn again from the 82nd Airborne Division or XVIII Airborne Corps). The student ODAs will guide their “G” Band through the planning and execution of the mission, doing their best to build up the skills and confidence of the guerrillas. During the actual event, the ODA members will then make sure the guerrillas are out front in the action. And after it is over, they will try to spread as much credit as possible out among the guerrillas for any successes they achieve. By means of this kind of intensive care, feeding, and attention to detail, you take ragtags like the Afghan mujahideen and turn them into the kinds of organized forces that can kick butt on a major army like the former USSR’s.
    D+8 (day sixty-eight in simulated time) begins the final phase of Robin Sage. There are a series of training operations of helicopter/airborne landing zone procedures to teach the guerrillas how to support conventional forces (a conventional invasion will come later). The student ODA and “G” Band also prepare and execute a simulated precision raid on an infrastructure target such as a bridge, a dam, or a power plant. On this operation the guerrillas will do much of the technical work, and (if all goes well) lead the mission on their own.
    A number of significant events end the exercise.
    D+12 (day seventy-two in simulated time) involves a simulated link-up with conventional forces (i.e., after the “conventional” invasion), after which comes the very difficult process of demobilizing the guerrilla forces and supervising the turn-in of their weapons (a very large real-world problem; insurgents aren’t necessarily eager to give up their weapons or become peaceful citizens... see Northern Ireland). The guerrillas will then receive “medals” and “certificates of service” to liberated Pineland. 30
    When all this is done, the student ODA is extracted and returned to their forward operating base where they will turn in equipment, write reports, and wait for the final judgments of the Phase III cadre. The tough job of informing those who have failed or must try again is done on the afternoon the student ODAs return to Camp MacKall. And then they are moved out swiftly to their next assignment.
    A happier fate awaits those who have made the grade. They are allowed a night of rest and time for clean up. Then the “Q” Course graduates are marched into the Camp MacKall mess hall for an awards ceremony and dinner. Here they are inducted into the 1st Special Forces Regiment, and are presented with their Green Berets and the badge for their newly assigned SFG (which goes on the front of the beret). It is a powerful moment, and there are often tears of pride.
Into the Teams
    The “Q” Course graduates now have their Green Berets and group assignments. Even so there are still a number of challenges to overcome before they are assigned to their first ODAs. First on the list (preferably after some leave) is language school. With the exception of their combat skills, nothing is more useful to a SF soldier than the ability to speak the language of the people he will live and work with. The skill does not come easy or cheap. Consider the following list of operational theaters and their major languages:
    Every new SF soldier is expected to learn at least one foreign language, depending upon the theater his group is assigned to and the needs of the group. Some (like Romance languages: Spanish, French, etc.) are relatively simple to learn, and students can be conversational (what the Special Forces call Level I proficiency) in just a few months, while Level III proficiency (speaking the language like a native) might take only nine months for a well-motivated student. On the other end of the spectrum, Level I proficiency in complex languages like Chinese and Arabic can take over a year.31 In any event new SF soldiers must learn their language prior to reporting to their SFG. At times, this training can actually take longer than the combined SF selection/qualification process (up to three years).
    After language school, each SF soldier must attend the Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE) school at Fort Bragg. The SERE course is run for at-risk personnel who may be captured and tortured, and it is quite difficult—and much dreaded (there is no training experience in the American military that is more hated).
    Without going into the highly classified details of the SERE curriculum, let me say that the course shows soldiers how to avoid becoming a prisoner of war ... or (if that proves impossible) how to survive captivity, and (if the opportunity arises) how to escape. It is now time for the new Special Forces soldiers to head to their first SFG assignment.
    There they will be given very little time to get used to the new routine. The current operations tempo of the SF community means that they will probably spend at least ninety days out of their first year overseas, with the only break being an opportunity to attend either military free-fall parachute or combat diver training.
    The advanced parachute training is conducted at the Military Free-Fall Course at Yuma, Arizona. This is a “joint” (multiservice) school, with instructors from all the military services. Free-fall jumping requires a far higher level of training and skill than conventional military parachute jumping (where the parachutes are deployed with static lines). It also is far more technical and dangerous.
    Currently, the Special Forces qualify their personnel in two major forms of free-fall jumping. These are:
        • High Altitude-Low Opening (HALO)—In HALO deliveries, personnel wearing special breathing (force-fed oxygen) apparatus jump from high altitudes. They then free-fall for up to two minutes at speeds greater than 125 mph/205 kph. At an altitude of only a few thousand feet, they pop their parachute canopy. The extremely small radar signature of an individual HALO means that a whole ODA can be delivered undetected deep into denied territory.
        • High Altitude-High Opening (HAHO)—Not as well-known as the HALO technique, HAHO is actually the more tactically useful delivery method. While the equipment is generally similar, the opening altitude for the MC-4 steerable parachute is much higher. By opening the parachute just after exiting the aircraft, the jumper can glide for upwards of 25 miles/50 kilometers from the drop point. For example, a jumper equipped with a small GPS receiver can drop just outside an enemy’s boarder, and then glide to a precision landing well inside denied territory. This is a really slick way to accomplish a tactical insertion, and like the HALO jump technique, cannot easily be picked up on radar or other sensors.
          High-altitude jumping allows Special Forces soldiers to make discrete, covert insertions. A military transport aircraft flying at extremely high altitudes (over 30,000 feet/9,144 meters) can look like a commercial flight, and deliver a force of SF soldiers stealthily.
    Students at the joint Military Free-Fall School at the Army’s Yuma Proving Ground in Arizona. These students are being taught high-altitude precision parachute insertion techniques.
    JOHN D. GRESHAM
    Tactical infiltration from underwater requires the use of Self-Contained Underwater Breathing Apparatus (SCUBA) gear. Though SOCOM also operates the Navy’s SEAL teams, which have serious underwater capabilities, Special Forces also has its own underwater capability. To this aim it has established a Combat Diver certification program, which is located at a state-of-the-art facility in Key West, Florida. Here SF soldiers are taught the skills needed for SCUBA and other underwater breathing systems, as well as tactical insertion and underwater navigation techniques. Though the curriculum is very like the one used by the SEALs, it is focused on supporting the specific operations of the Special Forces.32
    The next few years of a Special Forces soldier’s life will be very busy. Barring the occasional major regional conflict, a typical SF soldier can expect to spend between ninety and 180 days a year downrange (that’s Special Forces for overseas) and the rest of the time training. The only real break from this routine will be the occasional staff assignment at home base, or one of the many other training courses that he can attend if he is lucky enough to find the time. For example, 18Bs (weapons sergeants) can attend sniper school to refine their long-range shooting skills. 18Fs (intelligence sergeants) can attend advanced intelligence and technical courses.
    But this is all icing on the cake. The real life in Special Forces is about being in the SF ODA teams and going on missions downrange. This is the reason soldiers join the Special Forces, and why most choose to stay in.
