---

author: ["Tom Clancy"]
title: "GT07 Special Forces A Guided Tour of Us Army Special Forces - clan_9781101127421_oeb_frw_r1.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Tom Clancy - GT07 Special Forces A Guided Tour of Us Army Special Forces"
tags: ["special", "force", "military", "army", "president", "warfare", "state", "soldier", "green", "beret", "war", "united", "would", "kennedy", "chief", "men", "guerrilla", "general", "whose", "america", "command", "staff", "upon", "one", "sergeant"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/GT07SpecialForcesAGuidedTourofUsArmySpecialForces-clan9781101127421oebfrwr1html

---


Special Forces
    Foreword
    President John F. Kennedy was a voracious reader. Early in his presidency, at the urging of Roger Hilsman (who was then Director of the State Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research and a World War II OSS veteran with guerrilla warfare experience), the president made himself familiar with the revolutionary writings of Che Guevara and Communist China’s Mao Tse-tung, as well as the military philosophy of the Vietnamese General Vo Nguyen Giap, whose book People’s War, People’s Army offered JFK a revealing taste of the future. As he reflected on these and other sources, our dynamic young president came to feel that the threat to the security of the United States posed by irregular, clandestine, and covert politico-military aggression was grave enough to demand special attention. And he concluded that in the turbulent world of the 1960s, the forces of instability and conflict were largely not vulnerable to attack by conventional military weapons and tactics. As a student of international affairs, President Kennedy was convinced that:
      “... [A] whole new kind of strategy, a wholly different kind of force, and therefore a wholly different kind of military training ... was called for. ”
    Few of the president’s peers would pursue his studies of unconventional warfare, or reach the conclusions he reached. This failure would later haunt the United States.
    In the early 1960s it was generally accepted in America’s high military command and staff circles (including the Joint Chiefs of Staff) that there was nothing unique about Ho Chi Minh’s war then smoldering in Southeast Asia. Public statements by very high-ranking Army officers made light of the idea that guerrilla warfare was important or posed any serious problems, and rejected any inference that an intense political struggle was woven through the fabric of Communist military action in Southeast Asia.
    As far as the majority of senior leaders were concerned, the basic training, leadership, motivation, organizational principles, tactics, and strategy that had won America’s wars in the past could handle any conflict situation, and would be more than adequate for Indo-Cbina—or any other land infected with guerrilla warfare.
    It was the president himself, and not his military advisors, who first perceived that the front line of defense against paramilitary aggression had to be in the hearts and minds of the threatened population. Though the Joint Chiefs of Staff and other high level military leaders did not share his enthusiasm for the development of an unconventional military capability, there was within the ranks of the U.S. Army a small element whose genes had been inherited from the behind-the-lines OSS warriors of World War II. These unconventional soldiers had been given the label of Special Forces.
    It was President Kennedy’s desire that Special Forces become an elite corps of experts both in guerrilla warfare and in counterguerrilla operations, and he made his wishes known to the Joint Chiefs of Staff in very firm terms. Even so, several aspects of the Special Forces Prototype, which was being crafted in response to the desires of the Commander in Chief, were in for heavy going. The reasons were traditional. Unlike the armies of other great powers past and present, the United States Army has always looked with disfavor upon the concept of elite military organizations. Both special warfare and special forces were terms that raised hackles among conventional regulars.
    Which meant there was, for example, minimal official Army support for the philosophy of the great Sun Tzu, which held that special men and units could be found and formed: “When all troops are encamped together, the general selects from every camp its high-spirited and valiant officers who are distinguished by agility and strength and whose martial accomplishments are above the ordinary. These are grouped to form a Special Corps. Of ten men, but one is selected; of ten thousand, one thousand.”
    By way of contrast, the U.S. Army’s vast personnel system was designed to handle the manpower requirements that our nation of over two hundred million souls would generate in time of war. This system focused with reluctance and some hostility on the Special Forces microcosm from which only minuscule conventional fighting power was expected to emerge. For example, the smallest unit of Special Forces, the “A” Detachment, had only two officers, with ten enlisted men (each a noncommissioned officer or rated specialist) under their command. These men were not expected by Special Forces leaders to directly face a heavy, mechanized division. They had other, far more valuable uses. The point was that no unit of similar size had anything like their many capabilities and skills.
    Sergeant Barry Sadler’s famous “Ballad of the Green Beret” made this point well. To a number of members of the U.S. Army’s General Staff, Sergeant Sadler had put to music the chief reasons why they supported an expansion of Special Forces reluctantly or not at all:
      “Silver wings upon their chest, These are men, America’s best. One hundred men we’ll test today. But only three win the Green Beret. ”
    The first chapter of Robin Moore’s 1965 best seller, The Green Berets, outlined just how tough it was to become a fully qualified Special Forces soldier. As Moore pointed out, most demanding of all were the unbending requirements that the products of this unprecedented training exhibit character, moral courage, dedication, honesty, and true patriotism, in addition to the technical military skills and physical standards that set them apart from “general purpose” troops. They were anything but run-of-the-mill. They were “special” in every sense. And it was precisely this category that placed Green Berets in frequent jeopardy of being at war with the rest of the Army.
    The Vietnam chapter of American military history reflects little in the way of strategic, tactical, or political credit upon our beloved United States. On battlefields that rarely resembled those Americans had seen—or expected—the massive battering ram of American firepower proved no answer to a will-o‘-the-wisp adversary who was more vulnerable to the weapons of political and psychological warfare than to bullets and bayonets. The United States Army’s Special Forces were perhaps the only element of U.S. military power in Vietnam that practiced the art of persuasion as a major weapons system. Their influence resulted in psychological denial to the VC and the NVA of human and geographic areas that would otherwise have fallen under their control.
    In time, media emphasis on the educational and humanitarian side of the tough, all-purpose Special Forces soldiers led to invitations from other countries ... countries that would previously have rejected out of hand the presence of Green Beret soldiers whose only skills appeared to lie in the murky area of guerrilla warfare. Serving in hundreds of localities around the world and in some of the most complex politico-military environments imaginable, they have provided a type of support for America’s strategic aims possible to no other forces within the U.S. inventory.
    President Kennedy’s name will be linked forever with the history and ideals of the United States Army’s Special Forces—and with their proud symbol, the Green Beret. On the 12th of October 2001, forty years will have passed since a group of regular Army soldiers appeared before their Commander in Chief wearing a distinctive type of headgear never before authorized by the U.S. Army, but now approved by the president himself. The Green Beret had emerged from the unauthorized—even prohibited—category to become the distinctive badge of the most carefully selected and highly trained body of American soldiers that had ever been part of any fighting force.
    Among those present was Francis Ruddy, a soldier whose outstanding leadership qualities had resulted in his promotion to the position of Command Sergeant Major of the Special Warfare Center. Ruddy had set standards of conduct and performance that would be associated with his name wherever Special Forces were in action.
    Following the president’s assassination, it was Special Forces Command Sergeant Major Francis Ruddy who proposed that the Special Warfare Center be called the John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center. And it was Command Sergeant Major Ruddy who, in Arlington National Cemetery, emotionally and reverently removed his precious Green Beret and placed it gently upon the fresh grave of his slain president.
    Since those long-ago events, the Special Forces of the United States Army have in every way lived up to President Kennedy’s hopes and expectations.
    During the years that I spent personally engaged with the alchemy and philosophy that led to today’s Special Operations Forces, one of my major challenges was to explain Special Forces to our own military brothers in arms. Though this new phenomenon had grown from old roots that were deeply imbedded in America’s history, it was always difficult to explain the phenomenon’s esoteric nature.
    One vehicle I quickly discovered for communicating some of this to my military colleagues and the thousands of other visitors and trainees hosted by the Special Warfare Center during my 1961 to 1964 tenure was what we called the “Gabriel Demonstration” (named for a Special Forces hero of the Vietnam conflict).
    At a “Gabriel,” Special Forces soldiers in a field setting and surrounded by the tools of their trade explained to their audiences the nature of their training and how they related to the then little known “A,” “B,” and “C” Detachments.
    And yet, as effective as this visual and hands-on educational effort proved to be, it only partially explained the nuances of a mechanism and philosophy aimed at focusing paramilitary power upon targets that were not always vulnerable to the fire and movement of conventional military force.
    Now, finally, I have a book to give to people who want to understand our community. Tom Clancy’s guided tour of our beloved Special Forces demonstrates a truly remarkable grasp of the intangibles and intricacies that characterize the unconventional element of our national defense system. I hope that you enjoy it as much as I have, and take away some of the lessons that I have spent a lifetime trying to get across to people in all walks of life, from presidents to housewives.
    —Lieutenant General William P. Yarborough,
    USA (Retired)
    Southern Pines, North Carolina
