---

author: ["Tom Clancy"]
title: "GT07 Special Forces A Guided Tour of Us Army Special Forces - clan_9781101127421_oeb_c09_r1.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Tom Clancy - GT07 Special Forces A Guided Tour of Us Army Special Forces"
tags: ["would", "president", "one", "valdez", "indonesian", "adil", "two", "could", "said", "like", "force", "army", "weapon", "get", "airport", "air", "people", "also", "general", "nuclear", "good", "time", "ambon", "merdeka", "thing"]
categories: [Reference]
url: /posts/reference/GT07SpecialForcesAGuidedTourofUsArmySpecialForces-clan9781101127421oebc09r1html

---


Special Forces
    Operation Merdeka
“Merdeka” is Indonesian for “freedom.” For Indonesians, as with all people, freedom is more than a value in itself, it also implies truth, justice, dignity, the absence of oppression, and a good life for oneself and one’s family. For many people, Indonesians among them, these values understandably carry a sacred force. And this was especially the case in Indonesia during the heady years following the expulsion of their Dutch colonial masters, the years of the Sukarno presidency—years of grandiose, highly visible, and expensive “projects” and little economic or political progress. The word merdeka was a mantra with Sukarno. The national holiday, their Fourth of July, is called Merdeka Day. And Sukarno named his most grandiose projects and monuments “Merdeka This” or “Merdeka That.” Thus, in Jakarta there is a Merdeka Square (on one side is the U.S. Embassy; on the other, the Presidential Palace) and a Merdeka Stadium. All over Indonesia, there are Merdeka parks and Merdeka bus terminals. For a time merdeka was a greeting, like “salaam,” or “shalom.”
    Over the years, tens of thousands of Indonesians have died fighting for merdeka. And tens of thousands more have been murdered or massacred because they were thought to threaten it—Chinese, who had lived in the country for generations, because it was believed they had undeservedly taken wealth from the native born; Christians because they were not Muslims; Muslims because they were not Christians.
    What did these losses gain? Not a lot over the years. Though there have been the trappings of democracy—president, cabinet ministers, and parliament, the Army has by and large run the country from behind the scenes. Instead of a government of, by, and for the people, it has been largely a government of, by, and for the Army. Outlying provinces have been operated as private fiefs by Army generals, for their own benefit. Many officers and soldiers hold murder and looting to be their legal right. The more thuggish and murderous of local militias (gangs used to put down opposition to the government, i.e., to the Army) have been supported and supplied by the Army. And in places like East Timor, the Army has been a force of anarchy and destruction rather than order and justice.
    The Army has in fact a legal “justification” for its power position in the state. It was specifically charged by the Indonesian constitution to protect, guard, and nurture the nation. Army generals took that to mean they were licensed to run things the way they wanted. Some folks get more merdeka than others (as George Orwell observed in another context).
    In the mid ‘60s, the corrupt but charismatic Sukarno was replaced by the corrupt but uncharismatic Suharto (an army major general before assuming the presidency) and a clique of equally corrupt cronies. Suharto brought greater order, and a measure of economic progress, but this was more than offset by his and his cronies’ looting. They stole more wealth than they created—billions of dollars. Then they parked it offshore, where it would do the nation no good.
    Indonesians are a volatile people, for whom rioting is an art form. In 1998, Suharto was driven out of office after weeks of increasingly violent riots. He was replaced by a friend and crony, Dr. B. J. Habibie, a technocrat of the most shallow kind, and a lover of extravagant and grandiose high-tech projects. Habibie was a joke, but his presidency was blessedly short-lived. He was replaced—democratically—by President Abdurrahman Wahid, a Muslim cleric, and by all accounts a man of integrity. His mandate was to reform the government (read for that defang the Army). As of this writing (early in 2000), he has made a brave start toward that goal ... but it is a difficult and perilous journey, and Wahid’s fragile health may not stand up to the hard job ahead.
    What does all this say about merdeka?
    It has yet to be realized for the two hundred million citizens of what could be the world’s third largest democracy. Yet there is hope ... and reason to fear.
    2005
    During his years in office, President Wahid had some modest successes, yet he failed to make Indonesia work. His body was simply not up to the strain ... though it is arguable that no body could handle that much strain. He faced—and failed to solve—two intractable problems:
First, the Balkanization of the military.
    It actually makes sense that a nation of thousands of islands provide itself with an effective navy and air force to provide protection against Indonesia’s few external enemies (smuggling and piracy are greater threats than invasions). Conversely, a large army is not required (though a small, highly trained, and quick-moving strike force could come in handy).
    Wahid managed to diminish the power of the army by getting rid of some of the more flagrant Neanderthals, thieves, and murderers within the officer corps, by starving it of money, and by playing factions against one another. At the same time, he funneled greater funds into the Navy and Air Force, and gave plum jobs to the relatively more honest and trustworthy, and better educated, Navy and Air Force officers. All of this did not, of course, sit well with the old-line Army officers who survived Wahid’s assaults. They missed the constitutional perks that made them the guardians and “nurturers” of the nation, and they missed even more their easy access to the nation’s money teats.
Second, the Balkanization of the country.
    By 2004, Aceh (on the northwest comer of Sumatra) and Irian Jaya (western new Guinea) had become virtually independent, while sectarian fighting in the Moluccas (once the Spice Islands, now called Maluku by the Indonesians) had seen the killing of thousands and the destruction of much of the islands’ infrastructure. By 2001, destruction by rampaging militias (Christian and Muslim) had devastated the provincial capital of Kota Ambon (Ambon City) on Palau Ambon (Ambon Island). There was scarcely a building untouched by gunshot or crude, homemade bombs. Tens of thousands of people tried to find shelter in the burned out, roofless buildings that had once been their homes. The militias destroyed water, power, transport, communications, hospitals, and schools. In 2002 the Army, abdicating responsibility (while continuing to support the more violent Muslim militias), abandoned the province to the mobs.
    The Moluccas are not a chain. They are simply those islands in the Indonesian archipelago that lie scattered between the larger islands, Sulawesi and New Guinea, on a roughly north-south line. Because they were once the jewels of the Dutch empire and the prime source of Holland’s spice wealth (in 1492, Columbus was headed in their direction), Dutch influence is heavy, and the islands had at one time a Christian majority (they were probably the most Christian area of Indonesia). But by the turn of the millennium, an ever growing influx of Muslims had made Christians a minority (though a large and powerful one).
    For a time friction between Christians and Muslims was minimal. In fact, during the Suharto years (think of him as an Indonesian Tito), the two sides could actually be called friendly. Muslims would help Christians build churches, and Christians would help Muslims build mosques.
    But with him gone, chaos ... much of it inspired by Army agitators. Backward-looking officers seemed to think a grateful nation would welcome them as saviors: “You have to love us for snatching you out of the fire that we lit!”
    Wahid died in 2002. After his death, the new administration had a weak president, Gajah Mada, and a popular vice-president, an Air Force general named Ratu Adil. Adil was popular with the nonarmy military and with a substantial portion of the ordinary people.
    By 2004, the American-educated Adil (a B.S. from UCLA, and graduate work at the National Defense University in Washington) had managed to bypass his mostly ineffective presidential superior, and set in motion a small (but carefully thought out) number of positive initiatives. Among these was the JISF, a “Joint (i.e., multiservice) Indonesian Special Forces” group. This small, but highly trained (by U.S. Special Forces) organization was immediately put to good use in the Moluccas, where a JISF team, aided by U.S. Special Forces, succeeded in separating the warring factions, enforcing an uneasy peace, and making a strong start at rebuilding the islands’ devastated infrastructure.
    December 2005
    This tenuously emerging peace in the Moluccas did not please everyone, and it especially displeased the Sons of the Jihad (the SJs), a violently fanatical Muslim sect based in Java, Indonesia’s most populous island, and its economic and agricultural center. In retaliation for what they saw as a betrayal of their coreligionists in the Moluccas (and secretly urged on by the Army), thousands of SJs embarked on a holy jihad by boat flotilla to set things right. On 10 December, ten thousand Muslims sailed toward Ambon.
    They could not be allowed to land there.
    They were intercepted by the Indonesian Navy and diverted to an anchorage near Suli, a town on the east side of Baguala Bay, and about ten kilometers east of Kota Ambon.
    Though they were prevented by Navy and JISF units from completing their “crusade,” the situation was tense.
    ODA 142 Team House
    Pattimura Airport
    Ambon, Indonesia
    0526 25 December 2005
    “Shit!” said Captain Carlos Valdez, Commander ODA 142, as the intense early dawn flash yanked him awake. The glare came from the direction of the rising sun, but it was incredibly brighter. Valdez, almost without thinking, rolled out of bed and put the cot—admittedly not much protection—over him. He had a pretty good idea what caused the flash. And it was just about the last thing he imagined he’d run into in Ambon. He covered his head with his arms and counted seconds. “One thousand one, one thousand two, one thousand three, one thousand four ...”
    The sound of the blast came. Noisy, but he’d been in thunderstorms as bad. Seconds later, the wind whipped through, fierce to be sure; yet again, not as bad as it could have been. Bad would have been 200 meters from ground zero (because you are instantly dead). Worse would have been three kilometers from ground zero (because you might live for a little while). If his rough and ready second counting was anything close to accurate, he estimated the nuke had been set off something like 20- 30 kilometers away ... 15-20 miles. “Good, the farther the better.”
    Valdez stood up, went over to his window, and threw open the shutters. Several kilometers away to the east, dark against the gray dawnlight, a lightning-splashed mushroom cloud was roiling up.
    “Jesus!” he shouted at the top of his voice, without realizing it.
    He had not yet begun to form serious questions. But on the outer edges of his consciousness a few were starting to take shape: The nuke hadn’t hit the city, which was ten kilometers across Ambon Bay. It was to the east of that. Where? Somewhere near Baguala Bay, probably. But mostly, Why?
    “Jesus!”
    He thought of Karen and the boys. Was this a worldwide thing? he wondered. The Big Madness? Or just a local insanity? Something in him told him they were okay ... that he was in the middle of some local insanity. But I got problems!
    Another thought hit him: Shit, Merry Christmas!
    Somebody was standing in his doorway (there was no door). “Sir, you okay?” It was Valdez’s warrant, Max Buser (called Bruiser by his friends), looking just about as dazed as Valdez felt. Like Valdez, he was wearing boxer shorts and a T-shirt.
    “Yeah,” Valdez answered. “You, Bruiser?”
    “Ticking.”
    “Okay. Then let’s get moving,” Valdez said, realizing that they had a lot to do. Somebody had set off a nuke. And he knew he and the rest of his ODA had been instantly elected to do what they could to help survivors and start the cleanup.
    Luckily, his guys were not alone. They would be aided by a few good friends.
    The team was not actually located on the airport proper, but a stone’s throw away in the village of Laha, on Ambon Bay. They had boats there, which gave them an edge in mobility. The ODB commanding them (ODB 140) was located at the airport itself, housed in a loaned Indonesian Air Force facility. Another ODA (146) was in Kota Ambon, and a third (144) at Passo, a town on the narrow isthmus that separated the two peninsulas that made up Palau Ambon.
    It hit Valdez just then that Passo, which was east of the capital, would have been awfully damned close to ground zero. “Shit,” he muttered to himself, “we’re going to have to get help to them, and pretty damned fast.”
    He turned his mind again to available forces:
    They would have Indonesian help. Especially useful would be Lieutenant Colonel Kumar’s two companies of JISF guys. The JISF had replaced the army in the peacekeeping role in the Moluccas, which was the prime reason the islands had achieved something like peace and stability. Kumar was a good guy; he and Valdez had grown close over the months they’d been working together. (He remembered just then that JISF units were at Siri, on Baguala Bay, forming a firewall against the madmen of the Sons of the Jihad. Shit, he thought. That can’t have been far from ground zero.)
    There was also the local police—newly created and far less effective and reliable than the JISF, but sure to do more good than harm.
    Valdez and Bruiser were by then at the team’s comms center, a few doors down from Valdez’s room. And moments after that they learned that their comms were actually (as designed) hardened against EMP (Electro-Magnetic Pulse) effects from nuclear weapons. That meant the SF guys could communicate with each other, and with their 1st SFG superiors in Okinawa and the U.S. It also meant that they were probably the only people on the island who could communicate with anybody (with the possible exception of the JISF, but there was no word from Kumar yet). The EMP had surely fried transistors in phones, cell phones, radio, TV, and computers ... and probably all the navigation and safety systems at the airport.
    Meanwhile, ODA 142 got its marching orders from Major Ron Carver, the ODB commander. The team was to be split. Valdez would take half over to the Kota Ambon side of the island and get himself up to the top of Gunung Sirimau, the 950-meter high hill that would provide the best visibility of Baguala Bay. It was Carver’s estimate (like Valdez’s) that the nuke had probably been set off somewhere on or near the bay. Carver also had a pretty good idea what the nuke had been set off to destroy—the Sons of the Jihad flotilla anchored off of Siri. Though who had done it, and why, remained a very open question.
    Valdez’s job was to gather information about damage, and get some idea about survivors.
    The other half of the team would race over to Passo (there was a decent road along the coast), and do what they could for the team there. The ODA in Kota Ambon would link up with Kumar’s people. Carver estimated it might be two days before serious relief help arrived. Until then, it was going to be largely up to them and the JISF to organize the medical and relief efforts.
    The White House
    Washington, D.C.
    1713 24 December 2005
    “So what gives?” the president asked, visibly out of joint, as he entered the Situation Room. The furthest thing from his mind was a call from Admiral Len Croce, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, urgent enough to pull him out of the Christmas Eve party his wife had set up for the rest of their very large and usually very spread-out-across-the-country family—sons, daughters, and their husbands, wives, and children. He enjoyed his family; he did not like to be dragged away from them on the most joyous holiday of the year.
    The president, a tall, lanky, loose-limbed man, was wearing a pastel-colored cardigan, and he was accompanied by a Corgi dog. He had the almost too-relaxed manner of a Mister Rogers, and this had charmed the electorate into believing he would be another presidential grandfather like Eisenhower or Reagan. The manner was deceiving; he was not as easygoing as he looked (any more than Eisenhower and Reagan had been). He had served with distinction in the Gulf War, successfully run for Congress, and then was elected governor of a populous western state (which he had governed well). He was tough, decisive, and short-tempered.
    And the dog was obedient. The president murmured a command and it lay down quietly next to the chair the president usually occupied. Then the president looked around, expecting to see more than the two top advisors now present ... until it hit him that it was Christmas Eve. They were accompanied by a pair of high level gofers whose names escaped the president.
    The expression on Croce’s face was grim. Next to him stood Richard Callenbach, the president’s National Security Advisor, also grim.
    “Mr. President,” Croce announced, “word came to NMCC from Colorado Springs a few minutes ago that our DSP Pacific bird has picked up a double-flash in Indonesia.” He paused for a second to let that sink in; and in case it didn‘t, he added, “Somebody has set off a nuke.”
    The National Military Command Center at the Pentagon is the clearinghouse for military significant events. Defense Support Program satellites, in geosyncronous orbits, sense bursts of high-intensity thermal and other radiation. They see, in other words, events like rocket launches and nuclear detonations. The double-flash the DSP satellite observed in Indonesia was a sure signature of a nuclear explosion. The DSP bird then relayed the news to the 11th Space Warning Squadron at Shriever AFB near Colorado Springs, who fed the data to the NORAD warning center at Cheyenne Moun tain, who then relayed it to the NMCC and the president. If a clear and present danger to the nation had been perceived along that path (such as missile launches whose warhead trajectories ended in the United States or near U.S. facilities overseas), the president would have been informed in a few score seconds. In the current situation, where the risk to the U.S. was seen as more remote, it took half an hour. During that time the CJCS and other high-level national security types availed themselves of that interval to inform themselves of current American military and relief capabilities in and around Southeast Asia. They wanted to be able to give the president some options.
    RUBICON, INC. BY LAURA DENINNO
    “Where exactly?” the president asked.
    “Early estimates put it in the Moluccas, on the Island of Ambon,” Croce answered. He had come prepared with an open map, marked with the spot. Then he added, with a puzzled look, “There is nothing militarily significant there, or strategically or economically significant either, for that matter.”
    “You’re saying it’s an accident?”
    “No ... though it could be. I’m saying we have no idea why—barring an accident—anyone would want to set off one of those things there. Indonesia has no real enemies. None of the nearby nuclear powers—China, India, Pakistan—has any reason to be angry. The Indonesians themselves have never lusted after nuclear weapons. They don’t even have any nuclear power plants. Local oil covers all their energy needs.”
    “So it could have been an accident,” the president mused. “Or they could have done it to themselves ... assuming they got nukes. Which we know nothing about.” This last was a subtle rebuke. U.S. Intelligence should know who has nuclear weapons.
    “It’s possible,” Admiral Croce allowed.
    “What I’m thinking is that there’s been a lot of shit hitting the fan in that part of the world. Muslims fighting Christians and vice versa and crap like that. Not a lot of folks wear haloes.”
    “Possible,” Croce repeated.
    “But why would anybody nuke themselves,” the president continued to muse. “I heard of shooting yourself in the foot ... done it myself more than once.” He smiled at his own wit. “But this goes a little far.” He glanced over at his National Security Advisor. “So what do you think, Dick?”
    “What you say, Mr. President, makes sense.” He shrugged. “But Indonesia is an Asian country—a muddle wrapped in a mystery, wrapped in misdirection—and I wouldn’t venture to try to explain events there until I had a lot more facts than we do.”
    “So let’s get some facts. What do we have over there? Anything? Anybody? ... And where are the carriers?” he added.
    “There we may be in luck, sir,” Croce responded. “We’ve got the better part of a Special Forces company actually on Ambon, working with an Indonesian special forces unit and the local police, doing peacekeeping, communications and police training, and civil affairs infrastructure things. I’ve got people trying to get in touch with them as we speak. You have to understand, sir, that communications will be initially dicey. The EMP.”
    “I understand.”
    “I also talked to CINCPAC on my way over here. He’ll be giving me a list of units he can swing into Indonesia fast ... And we may be in luck here, as well. There’s a CVGB on a port visit in Perth, Australia, along with its Marine MEU (SOC) and ARG. We should be able to get them up near Ambon four days after you give the word.”
    “Tell CINCPAC to start them moving. If we have to stop them later, we can do that.”
    “They probably have already received the warning order. I’ll flash the go-ahead to CINCPAC.” He gave a nod to his aide, who moved to the side of the room and picked up a phone.
    “And what else?”
    “I have anticipated that we’ll need to go to DEFCON 4. And I recommend DEFCON 3 for those units in the region, or bordering it.”
    “Go ahead, do that,” the president ordered.
    DEFCON numbers represent states of military alertness. There are five of them. Peace is DEFCON 5 (peace in the sense that we have nothing serious to worry about right now). At DEFCON 4, command authorities are beginning to get a little nervous. At DEFCON 3, forces go on increased alert. At DEFCON 2, the threat looks imminent. DEFCON 1 is war. At DEFCON 1, pray for the survival of the human species.
    “And tell me what you hear from those Special Forces guys. I want to know what’s going on out there. And I want to know now.”
    “Yes, Mr. President,” the CJCS and the National Security Advisor said as one.
    “Meanwhile,” the president said, finishing up, “we are going to very soon get inundated with questions and alarms from the media. I don’t want to deal with them until we have some kind of handle on this thing. But have a statement for them from me drafted by morning. And have my speechwriters rewrite my Christmas address.”
    “It will be done.”
    “Oh yeah, unless there’s an overriding need, I don’t think you’ll need to call in other advisors tonight. You two will be enough ... and it is Christmas Eve.”
    The White House
    Washington, D.C.
    0245 25 December 2005
    “Captain Valdez, how are you?” The president spoke into the phone receiver. The line had been patched through to Valdez via SATCOM to Pattimura Airport, from where there was a good line of sight to the top of Gunung Sirimau, where Valdez and his team had set up for observation. “Can you hear me okay?”
    “Just fine, sir,” Valdez answered.
    “So tell me what you see.”
    “Yes, sir,” Valdez answered. “We’re situated at the top of a small mountain, sir, about three thousand feet high. It gives us a good view of Baguala Bay. Ground zero was maybe five kilometers—three miles—from our position.
    “There was a flotilla of small boats across the bay anchored next to Siri, a little town there, sir. They called themselves the Sons of the Jihad.”
    “I know about that,” the president interrupted.
    “Okay, sir,” Valdez said. “It looks to us like the bomb was set off in the water, close to shore, or maybe on shore a little ways. Whoever did it didn’t like the Jihad. The flotilla’s vaporized, sir. And so is the town.
    “We’ve also got heavy blast damage all around the bay. And it raised up a pretty big wave. There were six or seven towns around the bay. Not much of them is left ... wiped clean, sir. We had an ODA—an A-Team, sir—at one of them, Passo. I don’t think they made it.” The president could hear the other man choking up on that.
    “I’m sorry,” the president said, knowing how lame that must sound. “They will be in our prayers.”
    “Thank you, sir.” Then he continued, not wishing to linger on the loss of friends. “The JISF—Indonesian Special Forces we’ve been working with, sir—also lost some guys over at Siri. They have already sent some other guys in along the bay on Land Rovers. I don’t know yet if they have found survivors.
    “The mountain we’re on, sir,” Valdez continued, “has given the city, Ambon, good protection. Shadow effect. I doubt if there is much damage there ... maybe a few broken windows. And the airport is on the other side of another bay—Ambon Bay—from the city. The airport’s okay, too. That means the airport can handle relief aircraft ... and Ambon Bay can handle ships.”
    “Good. So the damage was pretty much limited to the other bay area?”
    “It appears so, sir. It could have been a lot worse.”
    “Do you have any idea, Captain, who did this thing? Or why?”
    “Not really, sir. Somebody didn’t like the Jihad.”
    “So it appears. Somebody with a bomb.”
    “Yes, sir.” Valdez anticipated the next question. “But we have no information, sir, about nuclear weapons in this part of the world. They shouldn’t be here.”
    “They shouldn’t be anywhere,” the president murmured, almost inaudibly.
    “So what about fallout?” the president asked, moving on (he had a list). “Can you give us some clues about where that might go?”
    “It was a dirty weapon, sir, a ground burst. It had to have picked up lots of water and lots of dirt and other stuff. That’s the bad news. The good news is the prevailing winds tend south this time of year ... the good news for us,” he amended. “It doesn’t look like we’ll get any rain today. I’d worry if we were. But south of here they could have problems. Timor’s maybe just over 300 miles downwind, to the southwest. And Darwin in Australia is less than a thousand. They could get some bad shit, if you pardon me, sir.”
    “I’ve heard worse. And it describes the situation only too well. I don’t think our Australian friends will be very happy.”
    The president moved the phone receiver away from his face. “I want to talk to the prime minister when I finish with the captain,” he said to his National Security Advisor.
    “We have U-2s up from Kadena AFB, Mr. President, in Okinawa,” Admiral Croce broke in. “They’ll be monitoring the fallout situation and taking samples. Analysis of these should tell us within seventy-two hours exactly where the weapons were made. And what kind of fallout situation we can expect. We will also send a DOE NEST team”—Nuclear Emergency Search Team—“from Las Vegas to monitor the situation on the ground.”
    “Good. That will be something. Meanwhile, our Aussie friends are going to be mega-pissed.” And then a spark lit his eyes. “Which is not necessarily a bad thing. They’re going to want to take some action. They could be a big help.”
    “They will be, Mr. President,” Croce said. “I already have people talking to people in Canberra.”
    “Fine, fine,” the president said, “we have to move fast.” He then resumed his conversation with Valdez. “Anything else you can tell me, Captain?”
    “No, sir. Not now, sir.”
    “Thank you, Captain.”
    “Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. President.”
    It was now three A.M. in Washington.
    Richard Callenbach’s female aide approached the president. “Mr. President,” she announced softly, “I think you need to look at a report we’ve just taken off the BBC World Service.” She pointed a remote at a TV screen, and a nice-looking blonde Brit female news reader appeared:
    “Minutes ago,” she announced, “Indonesian Major General Nusaution appeared on all the Indonesian national networks to make a startling announcement with reference to the even more startling nuclear explosion in the Moluccas early this morning.” The face of the general appeared onscreen. “According to General Nusaution,” she went on, “the Indonesian Armed Forces have been in possession of nuclear weapons for the better part of a year. These weapons, and I quote, ‘were obtained for purely defensive purposes, and were placed under the very highest security. Even so,’ the general continued, ‘through treachery at the highest and most trusted level, one of these weapons was stolen, and passed into the hands of Moluccan Christian radical separatist fanatics. They detonated that weapon in order to destroy the Sons of the Jihad ... and to permanently end the possibility of Muslim-Christian coexistence in Indonesia. We will provide conclusive evidence of this Christian conspiracy shortly.
    “ ‘These fanatics pose imminent danger to the nation,’ the general concluded. ‘The Army will, as always, protect the nation from all enemies—internal or foreign.’
    “General Nusaution has left more questions unanswered than he has answered,” the BBC announcer concluded. “First, how did they come to acquire nuclear weapons, and from whom. Second, why? And third, how could one of these weapons be stolen from a presumably secure facility?
    “So far, there are no good answers to these questions. We hope to have more answers soon. This is Linda Sillitoe reporting from Jakarta.”
    The aide clicked off the screen.
    “Not a bad analysis,” Richard Callenbach observed.
    “It still leaves more questions than answers,” Admiral Croce answered.
    “It does confirm one thing,” the president said. “You were right, Dick. The place is a muddle wrapped in a mystery wrapped in misdirection. Do you all realize that there may well be not a single truthful word in that general’s statement?”
    “How do you know that?” Richard Callenbach asked. He was the president’s resident skeptic.
    “My nose itched, Dick. My thumbs prickled. And ask yourself this: What Christian would set off a nuclear weapon on Christmas Day? Mark me on this: Some idiot who doesn’t know the first thing about Christians has set the Christians up.”
    Callenbach raised a skeptical eyebrow. But Croce’s gaze was more thoughtful. “If you’re right about that, sir,” he said, “then we may have much bigger problems in Indonesia than disaster relief in the Moluccas.”
    “You bet,” the president said, pleased that the admiral had caught his train of thought. “There are two hundred million Indonesians. We could be seeing something starting to go down there worse than former Yugoslavia.
    “Could the nuke have been the first shot in a civil war?
    “Whatever’s going down there, I don’t want to be caught flat-footed. Let me know by morning what we can do ... if we have to do something.”
    “We’ll do that,” Admiral Croce said.
    “We’ll need to put together a coalition,” Callenbach added. “It can’t be an American affair. And the existing Asian security collectives don’t really cover the case ... especially if it turns out there’s a civil war.”
    “It’s too bad this thing is not in the NATO sphere,” the president added to that thought. “Yeah, this can’t be an American affair: We need to bring in the Aussies and the Brits, of course, but also Thailand, the Philippines, Singapore, and Malaysia (they’ll be initially reluctant, but they’ll come aboard after the others do), and any other suspects. Get working on that now.
    “And by the way, the Indonesian government—or somebody over there ... somebody crazy enough to use it—has got their hands on at least one nuke. If there are others, find the bastards ... now!
    “Today’s was the first nuke fired in anger since Nagasaki. I want to make sure those crazies don’t fire off another one ... in, say, Jakarta.”
    Kota Ambon, Moluccas
    1750 25 December 2005
    JISF headquarters was located in what had once been police headquarters in Kota Ambon, on the comer of Jalan 111-115 Raya Pattimura and Jalan Ahmad Yani. Carlos Valdez hoped to find Lieutenant Colonel Kumar there, and he was in luck, but only just barely. Kumar was on the way out.
    “Hi, Kumar,” Valdez greeted his friend. “What gives?”
    “I’m on my way out to meeting Sam Fireside and I have set up with all the various local leaders.” Captain Sam Fireside was Commander of ODA 146. “We’ve rounded up all of them: Christians, Muslims, militia commanders, the whole catastrophe. And then we are going to draw water from the moon.”
    “Water from the moon?”
    “An Indonesian saying: ‘Do the impossible.’ They will cooperate, with us and with each other. If they don‘t, they’ll get no transportation, no communications, no support, and no medical aid.”
    “That should encourage them to listen to sweet reason.”
    Kumar made a sad, lopsided grin. “You’re welcome to join us.”
    “I’d like to. Sparks will fly ... before sweetness prevails. But I can’t. I’m on my way back to Pattimura to brief Major Carver; I decided to stop here on the way for a heads-up.”
    Kumar was short, slender, and very trim. His English was fluent (though Valdez was comfortable speaking Indonesian); he had been educated in the States, at Texas A&M.
    “Here, take a look.” He handed Valdez a piece of paper, printed on both sides in Indonesian. “We used our printing press you gave us to turn out thousands of these. Your Chinooks have been dropping them over the eastern parts of the island all afternoon.” (The Chinooks had come with CH-47D [4] of the California Army National Guard, on scene to provide the Special Forces with air support and transportation.)
    The leaflet told Valdez what he expected to find: “There has been a nuclear explosion.” (In case you don’t already know.) “Below are directions to move to safety. If you or someone close to you have the following symptoms—nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, headache, shortness of breath, rapid heartbeat—you need immediate medical care.
    “Medical care can be found at aid stations located in the following towns: Rutung, Lateri, Hunut, and Tulahu.” (These were the closest relatively undamaged towns to ground zero.) “Everyone must obtain and take potassium iodide pills to ward off radiation sickness. These would be available soon at the following locations.” (A list followed. The pills were being flown in from Australia, and Valdez was eager to start taking some himself. They helped sweep the zapping nasties from your body.) “Seriously injured would be transported to a hospital in Kota Ambon. If you know of anyone unable to help themselves, please inform officials at the above locations or any JISF soldier or officer you encounter.” There were maps and other graphics.
    Leaflets were a longtime Special Forces specialty. It was the world’s oldest technology for getting word out to large numbers of people, but still effective—especially in situations, as here, where the more technologically advanced media were inoperative. Valdez was pleased that Kumar and his JISF guys had learned the lesson so well.
    “Looks pretty good,” he said to Kumar. And then, “How are things going out there?”
    “We have people in boats and SUVs combing through what’s left of the towns around Baguala Bay. There aren’t many survivors there.”
    “Your guys at Siri?”
    Kumar’s shrug showed more than resignation. There was anger, too. “There’s nothing left there. Wiped clean. But they’ve been able to pull a few people out alive a few kilometers away ... and across the bay.”
    Another disturbing thought occurred to Valdez, “There’s no protective gear here. Your people on the bay will be taking more rads than they should.”
    “We’ll lose a few of them,” Kumar snapped bitterly. “Americans aren’t the only heroes.”
    Valdez gave his friend a sharp but pained look. “I’m sorry.”
    “I’m sorry,” Kumar replied quickly, immediately repentant for his outburst (which to an American was hardly an outburst; to an Indonesian it was a serious breech). “I shouldn’t have said that.”
    Valdez could only guess at the pain and stress his friend was feeling. These were his people out there suffering.
    “Your people are mostly backing us up with communications and C and C,” Kumar went on, “but your medics have joined ours out in the four frontline towns.”
    “And how is it out there?”
    “Ugly. Very ugly. We’re getting initially walk-in survivors, of course—blast and thermal damage, flying debris. Not much radiation yet—and what we do find are certain to die; it was a dirty bomb—but there’ll be more, surely.”
    He gave Valdez a suddenly impatient look. “I have to go.”
    “We’ll get through this,” Valdez said, by way of farewell.
    “We will,” Kumar answered bitterly.
    The Ministry of Defense Command Center
    Merdeka Square, Jakarta
    1930 25 December 2005
    The Indonesian Military Command Center was a large, high-ceilinged room furnished with ranks of long tables and computer terminals. On the front wall were three large screens, on which could be projected maps, slides, or video.
    The Indonesian vice-president, Radu Adil, sat at the front table, taking in the current situation. Currently dreadful. Nusaution’s announcement, and its follow-up “proofs,” had had the expected effects: The nuclear weapon exploded inside their country had sent students and other customary rioters berserk. Sectarian rioting had broken out in Jakarta and all over the country, especially in Java. Though the riots were “reportedly disorganized,” the initial signs were bad. Christians and Chinese (always the scapegoats in Indonesia) were being hunted down and murdered. It could get worse.
    “Reportedly disorganized. ” That was, of course, official bullshit, and Adil knew it. The riots were the work of Army instigators. They were foreplay leading up to some kind of orgasm that would spark an Army takeover attempt. The big question now for Adil: How and when would it come?
    He and his friends and allies were prepared for it. Had they prepared enough? Another big question.
    Next to Adil sat the Minister of Defense, Untung Sutopo—like Adil, an Air Force general—and the commanders of the Army, Navy, and Air Force: General Yani, Admiral Suwandi, and General Omar Dhani. All of them allies of the president, Gajah Mada. (Adil himself had come from a group technically opposed to Gajah Mada. He was made vice-president as a consensus-building measure.) The president himself was in his office in the Presidential Palace, but there was a link-up, and he occasionally made remarks through the public address system (usually inane, in Adil’s view).
    All eyes, except Adil‘s, were riveted on one of the large screens on the front wall, where General Nusaution (the official Army spokesman) was making another announcement over state TV. Adil had directed his face dutifully toward the screen, but only half his attention was there. Nusaution’s words, delivered in an “authoritative” and patronizing tone, were predictable—diatribe and invective and unfounded charges aimed at Christian fanatics and Moluccan “splittists” (a Chinese coined term he had picked up to denote separatists and secessionists). They had brought the day’s tragedy on themselves, he intoned in a voice dripping sanctimony. Yet it should also come as a warning to other “splittists” and Balkanizers. Disorder and anarchy will not be tolerated. Martial law has been declared, and the Army, under the direction of a group calling itself “The Committee for the Restoration of the Republic” is restoring order. Keep calm. Stay home. Don’t resist.
    “So they’re moving now,” Adil said to himself, not exactly surprised.
    At that moment he lifted a phone receiver and punched in a number. After fourteen rings someone came on at the other end.
    “Merdeka,” the voice said.
    “Activate Delphi,” Adil said, then called the president on his private number. There was no answer. Unsurprised, he replaced the receiver in its cradle and waited.
    He did not have long to wait. Seconds after Nusaution had finished his speech, army troops in combat gear were standing in all the exits. They were led by a colonel Adil knew vaguely. His name was Cancio.
    Very quickly and smoothly Cancio moved in, and was soon standing in the space in front of the screens.
    “Be calm,” he announced politely, though with none of the deference you’d expect he would offer military superiors. “This is a precaution to restore order. Please do not resist.”
    He then approached Adil and leaned down close to his ear.
    “The president is dead,” he whispered. “You can cooperate or not. Your choice. Your family are,” he paused significantly, “in our care. Your cooperation will make you useful to my superiors. I suggest that you comply. You will be taken by helicopter to a safe place.”
    Adil gave a brief nod that might be taken as assent. He knew he had no choice.
    Cancio pointed in the direction of a major. “He’ll be responsible for you. You’ll be safe with him.”
    Cancio then slipped his pistol out of its holster, and, with four quick, accurate shots, put bullets into the heads of the Minister of Defense, General Yani, Admiral Suwandi, and General Dhani. They slumped across the table.
    “Traitors,” he said calmly, then led the major and Adil to a helicopter waiting on the rooftop pad.
    Jakarta
    2330 25 December 2000
    Jakarta was a madhouse. The news of the Army intervention did not calm the rioters, it only inflamed them more. Buildings and cars were torched, shops were looted. There were dozens of deaths and hundreds of injuries. Though considerably reinforced Army troops had tried to restore order, they were clumsy and ill-trained for the job; as the night progressed, the mayhem in the streets had actually increased ... and it had been terrible during the afternoon. (The coup leaders had predicted an easy transition to their rule; this was not their only, or their worst, miscalculation.)
    Paradiso 2001 was a small Chinese vegetarian restaurant down an alley off of Jalan Sabang, and a ten-minute walk from the American Embassy. Two men, an Indonesian and an American, met there very late and took a quiet booth, with the expectation that chances were slim that either would be recognized. Both were in civilian clothes. The Indonesian was wearing tan slacks, batik shirt, and a pitji cap, the Indonesian national headgear. The American was dressed like a tourist, in shorts, flowered shirt, and baseball cap (New York Mets). The American was not a tourist; he was the American Air Attaché, Air Force Colonel Anthony Meyer (who had been in-country long enough to know that Indonesians frown on shorts). The Indonesian was Radu Adil’s top aide, Widodo Suratman.
    The meeting was Delphi.
    Suratman, who had not eaten since morning, ordered braised Chinese broccoli, fried rice, and tea. Meyer sipped on a Tsingtao beer while Suratman waited for his meal.
    “I have been authorized by Vice-President Adil,” Suratman said, after a decent diplomatic interval, “to pass over to you certain sensitive information. He will also make, through me, requests of the United States, which he hopes your country will honor.
    “But,” he added, with pleading eyes, “in whatever way you use this information, and whether or not you honor the vice-president’s requests—you must understand that this meeting never happened.”
    “Agreed,” Meyer said.
    “You must also understand that the president has been executed. Yani, Suwandi, Dhani, and Sutopo were all murdered at the Ministry of Defense Command Center. The vice-president was observed to leave the ministry in a helicopter with an Army colonel named Cancio and an unidentified major. He can be presumed to be alive—they could have killed him with the others, but did not.”
    “Did he leave voluntarily?”
    “If you mean by that, ‘Is he one of the conspirators?’ Hardly. They evidently feel they can use him. He is respected in and out of the military. He would make a useful figurehead.”
    “Is he weak enough to stand for that?”
    “I think he would choose to stay alive until the alternatives look worse.”
    Suratman moved on: “The coup now underway may well fail. I’d put the odds in its favor as no better than even. The conspirators have miscalculated their support among the people ... and among the military. The Navy and the Air Force will not back them. Nor will all the Army outside Java. But they are very strong in Java.
    “The conspirators call themselves the Committee for the Restoration of the Republic—the CRR,” he explained. Meyer nodded; he had heard the name earlier. “Their leader is General Tono Bungei, the Army commander of Java.”
    “Not Nusaution?”
    “He is a spokesman only, though the others have led him to believe he is more than that ... that he is, in fact, number two; but the real leaders use him only as a ... how do you say? A stalking horse?”
    “Close enough.”
    “We have prepared a list of the top people in the CRR, and other relevant information—military units likely to back them, units likely to oppose them, and units likely to stay neutral.” He passed over a Zip disc. The American slipped it in a shirt pocket.
    “The one monkey in the works ...”
    “Monkey wrench,” Meyer corrected, with a friendly smile. “My Brit friends call them spanners.”
    “Monkey wrench then,” Suratman corrected himself. “... is the nuclear weapons.”
    Meyer looked at the other closely, his eyes steely.
    “I must speak very plainly,” he said. “It has never been the intention of my government to acquire nuclear weapons. Never. The weapon that exploded this morning was never in the possession of my government. It was one of five acquired by Tono Bungei and his Army rogues, for their own use.”
    Meyer took that in for a time, then asked, “Who’d they get them from?”
    “We don’t know, but my guess would be Pakistan. The generals there, like ours, are Muslim; to them there is a mystique about a Muslim bomb ... It is only right to share this gift of Allah with Muslim friends ... And besides, the Pakistanis need money. They grow more impoverished by the second.”
    “And why did you wait to tell us this?”
    “It is still our country. We have our pride.
    “I want you to know also,” he continued, “that the story the rogues have given out about this morning’s tragedy is a lie. The rogues themselves are completely—totally—responsible.
    “They thought to kill four birds with one stone. First, to really hurt the Christians by putting the blame on them. Second, to set off chaos elsewhere, especially in Java. (In that they have succeeded.) Third, to encourage the others. As in: ‘Don’t forget, people of Indonesia, that we have nuclear weapons, and we will use them if we must.’ And fourth, to give the conspirators justification for a government takeover (to restore order and stability—the usual disguise for a power grab).”
    “It’s not a bad plan ... if you have the morals of Hitler. Who would use WMDs on their own people? ... Who outside of Saddam Hussein?”
    “Exactly. It is a plan from Seten”—from Satan.
    “Vice-President Adil would like these instruments of Seten to be removed from our country.”
    “And he’d like us to do it?”
    The other did not answer him.
    “The rogues are keeping the nuclear weapons at an army facility near Bandung ... adjacent to Bandung’s Husein Sastranegara Airport.” This was once a multimillion-dollar showpiece aircraft plant, Merdeka Aircraft (promoted by Habibie when he was Suharto’s Minister of Research and Development; it was one of Habibie’s dream children). After its inevitable failure, it was transformed into a clandestine Army facility.
    “We have obtained schematics and blueprints of this facility, as well as maps, photos, and other relevant data. You’ll find them on the disc I gave you.”
    Meyer looked at the other with greatly increased respect.
    “It is likely, I will add, that they have taken Vice-President Adil there. I hope you will use this information carefully and wisely. All of this is a momentary irritation for a great power such as the United States. It is a historical turning point for my country.”
    “Count on it.”
    The White House
    Washington, D.C.
    1525 27 December 2005
    The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff greeted the president as he entered the Oval Office. In his hand was a folder containing what he thought of as very exciting show-and-tell. He was about to brief his boss on the Indonesia situation.
    Len Croce himself showed signs of wear and tear. He hadn’t gotten a great deal of sleep over the past forty-eight hours. The president, by contrast, was well rested. He had returned only minutes before from a Christmas swing through his home state. Adoring crowds energized him. The president was wearing a bright red cardigan, partly in honor of the season and partly in honor of his mood, which was the emotional equivalent of Manifest Destiny.
    “So, Len, where do we stand?” the president asked the chairman brightly. He expected good news.
    “We’ve made real progress, Mr. President,” Croce answered. He passed the folder to the president, who dropped it on his desk, unopened. “Briefing material, charts, and such like,” he added, by way of explanation. “You’ll find it helpful.”
    “I’ll look it over,” the president answered distractedly. He was famously uninterested in military briefing materials.
    “The first thing we have,” Croce began, “is an early analysis of the atmospheric particles the U-2 picked up.” The president gave him a go-ahead nod. “It was a Pakistani-made weapon, based on a Chinese design, probably built about four years ago (it was an early Paki model), and it had a yield of between 50 and 60 kilotons. A nasty piece of work, but not big—as weapons go; a nuke, not a thermonuke.”
    “I’ll have State get on that,” the president mused. “We can turn some pretty big screws on the Pakis and the Chinese. They both could use knocking down a peg or two,” he added with less than perfectly battened-down delight. Sticking it to the Chinese always played politically. “This will give us nice leverage.”
    “Yes, sir,” Admiral Croce agreed, and quickly moved on. “As for post-detonation effects ...”
    “Fallout?”
    “Right. The weapon was not a clean design to begin with, and the blast—a ground burst—lifted up a lot of local materials. Timor, which is south of Ambon, got a heavy dose yesterday. There’ll be casualties.”
    “Deaths?”
    “Very likely.”
    “What will it take to get help to them?”
    “There is still a UN presence in East Timor, and it is very heavily Australian. The Aussies have agreed to augment that with medical personnel. West Timor—the Indonesian side—will also accept Australian help.”
    “Then it is not our problem?”
    “Not all problems are ours.”
    “Yeah!” the president agreed with some force.
    “The Aussies, of course, are having problems of their own with the fallout. It’s beginning to register in Darwin.”
    “Bad?”
    “Not so far ... and we don’t expect it to be nearly as serious as Timor. The bad stuff has had several more hundred miles to dissipate.
    “Of course,” he added, “there could be local hot spots. These things never take their course with a nice, predictable smoothness.”
    “And the Aussies ... ?”
    “... Are pissed,” Croce finished. “As we knew they would be. The diplomatic traffic between Canberra and Jakarta has been even more blistering than the PM’s public statements—and they have been very tough.”
    “Good,” the president said, unsurprised. This confirmed his own estimates of the Australian reaction.
    “Needless to say, the Aussies have taken a strong position in the Southeast Asia Coalition.” The hastily formed coalition to deal with the problem had quickly come to be called SEAC. “They’re totally onboard—both in the relief end and the military end. They would have gone with us anyway, but when they started getting a dose of rads ... and then heard what Adil had to tell us ...” He let that thought go uncompleted.
    “Terrific,” the president said, very pleased indeed. “And how about the rest of SEAC?”
    “We’re not telling all of them everything. But State has been feeling them out about military actions. We think they’ll all approve in the end. Nobody wants to see nukes going off, especially in their own neighborhood. And everybody would like to see Indonesia stable and peaceful. But they’re nervous about us intervening. The idea is to frame it all carefully, so everything we need to do appears absolutely unavoidable and necessary. State is working on that.”
    “That’s fine.”
    “And I’d like to go on to relief efforts, Mr. President.”
    “Go ahead.”
    “They’ve started to reach the site,” Croce said. “But it will take another couple of days for the whole thing to get there. Essentially, we’ll have the 82nd Airborne in there for blast site relief, and the 82nd Airborne commander will also double as JTF commander. We’ll have the CVBG from Perth in the area within another couple of days. And we’ll be beefing up the Special Forces units already on scene (who have carried the whole weight of this thing so far—they and their Indonesian counterparts; they are doing an outstanding job). There’ll also be air and logistical support.
    “The Time and Phase Deployment Schedule that’s in the folder will give you some idea of the way that will work.”
    The president opened the folder and gave those pages a glance. “Right,” he said.
    The president closed the folder, then asked, “And the Indonesian authorities?”
    “Too busy with their own problems to do more than make gloomy noises. There have been statements attributed to Adil, who is the nominal head of state, condemning SEAC on general principles. But they can hardly complain very much about our relief efforts. What are they doing to help, after all?
    “More to the point. The new government has not been able to take control of Java, much less the rest of the archipelago. In other words, they don’t carry any real weight. They don’t like us moving into their country, but all their complaints are just pissing in the wind.”
    “Can they win?”
    “Will their takeover succeed, you mean? It’s very doubtful, Mr. President. But the longer they hold the reins—even if it’s a phantom horse—the more trouble they can cause. Civil war is a real possibility. That would be a terrible catastrophe, with decades of very bad long-term consequences.”
    “We have to prevent that,” the president said, and then added, “and they have nukes.”
    “They have nukes. And they have demonstrated no qualms about using them against their own people. These are very bad guys, Mr. President.”
    “So then ... ?” the president asked, with a come on gesture.
    “The materials from Adil are priceless, Mr. President.”
    “And it’s certain that the bad guys are using him ... that he hasn’t gone over to them.”
    “As certain as we can be. They want a respectable figurehead. He fits the profile.”
    “He’s a great patriot,” the president said. “And far more courageous than I am. I hope he survives. I’d like to meet him.”
    “With those materials, sir, we have a damned good shot at getting those nukes. And we’ll do our best to make sure he survives.
    “The operation itself is relatively simple,” he continued, “not unlike some things we did in Panama a few years ago. We have a Ranger regiment now transiting to Darwin. They’re the class act when it comes to taking airports. They can secure just about any airport in the world in twenty minutes. They’ll take the airport at Bandung. And the Aussies’ SAS has a Tactical Assault Group who are ideal for taking the nuclear storage depot.”
    “Good idea, using the Aussies.”
    “Yeah, and they’re totally right for the job.”
    “We will also probably want to use a pair of B-2s to soften up opposition,” the admiral added.
    “When will this all go down?”
    “The night of the 31st.”
    “Thanks, Len. And by the way, get some sleep.”
    “I’ll try, Mr. President.”
    Jakarta, Java
    0430 28 December 2005
    Two large, long-range CH-53E Super Stallion helicopters, from USS Bataan, set down in Merdeka Square near the U.S. Embassy, after a lengthy flight (assisted by inflight refueling) from the ARG/CVBG steaming north from Perth.
    The previous day, the embassy had informed the Indonesian Foreign Office that a detachment of Marines from 13th MEU (SOC) would arrive by helicopter to beef up embassy security. The Foreign Office saw this as a reasonable request (most embassies in Jakarta, including America‘s, were by then being emptied of all except essential personnel), and it was duly acknowledged and approved. A no-brainer: The rioting had continued to grow in intensity, and ever increasing Army counterviolence had done little to calm the anarchy in the streets.
    The Marines would arrive on detached diplomatic duty, and they would, of course, have diplomatic immunity.
    As it happened, the U.S. Embassy had suffered very little at the hands of the mobs—a few tossed stones and eggs. With the expectation that this low-threat situation would continue, the Marines had come primarily armed with nonlethal weapons. But to be on the safe side, they also had a variety of lethal antipersonnel weapons.
    The Marines, as it also happened, were not all Marines. Joining them on one of the CH-53Es were a pair of ODAs (163 and 168) and a six man ODB (161) from Company F, 2nd/1st SFG, based on Okinawa (all of them in Marine drag). The ODB set up in the embassy, while their comms went on the roof, among the embassy antenna arrays. All electromagnetic emissions became one to those who might have liked to listen in.
    Meanwhile, the ODAs turned in for a good day’s sleep. They would need it. Starting that evening they would be very busy boys indeed.
    Pattimura Airport
    Palau Ambon
    28 December 2005
    Three days after the nuclear explosion, Pattimura had taken on the look of Tem pelhof in the days of the Berlin Airlift. New and (as it happened) much improved air traffic control equipment, flown in by the earliest flights from Kadena Air Force Base on Okinawa, had replaced the EMP-fried Indonesian electronics. Streams of aircraft—an air bridge—were now taking off and landing. Containers and shipping pallets had been piled in every available open space. To carry off all that stuff to where it was needed, local transport had been taken over by JISF. At any given moment, most of this could be found either at Pattimura or moving to or from it, while commandeered buses connected the refugee camps with the capital, and doubled as ambulances.
    Field hospitals had been set up in the camps, with triage stations closer to the blast site; specialized units to deal with severe thermal or radiation burns and other serious traumas had been set up in Kota Ambon.
    By this time, the most immediately pressing actions had been accomplished: Survivors had been coaxed, carried, or driven out of the danger zone near the blast and herded into camps; most of those who required medical attention had received some kind of care; and everyone on the island with any sense was taking potassium iodide tablets.
    The refugee camps were crowded, and shelter was scarce and far from comfortable, but overall conditions were far from appalling ... and they were improving daily.
    Meanwhile, the major portion of the 82nd Airborne had arrived and set up adjacent to the airport, along with various headquarters facilities: the 505th PIR HQ (under a brigadier general); the JTF HQ (under a major general, the 82nd Airborne commander); and an enlarged Special Forces HQ (FOB 11, 1st/1st SFG, under a lieutenant colonel) to supplement ODB 140.
    Airport security was tight. There was much to protect—arriving American servicemen and servicewomen (thousands of them), medical and technical people and equipment (including teams from NGOs like Doctors Without Borders), and billions of dollars worth of hardware. A single C-17A transport, for example, weighed in at around $220,000,000. That’s a lot of school lunches.
    Happily, Ambon Island was far from being “denied” territory. The JISF troops were friendly, cooperative, and effective; the majority of the Ambonese people had also proved to be friendly and grateful (the better than yearlong U.S. Special Forces presence had ensured that); and even previously warring religious factions were keeping the peace. And yet, unhappily, there was no scarcity of unfriendlies in Indonesia.
    Some of these made their presence felt on 28 December.
    The MH-53J Pave Low helicopter is big, fast, and a kludge—not so much purposefully designed for Air Force Special Forces operations112 as cobbled together out of available systems (inside it looks like Dr. Frankenstein’s laboratory in one of its comic manifestations). It is built around a basic CH-53D Sea Stallion air frame, it is heavily armed, heavily protected, heavily equipped with electronic equipment (FLIR, terrain-following radar, the works), it carries a five-man crew, and it leaks fluids113 like rain. But kludge or no, don’t mess with one. It does the job.
    Air Force Major Al Tatum commanded the Pave Low detachment flown in from Kadena. As soon as his four birds were checked out as flyable, he asked ODA 142 commander Carlos Valdez to accompany him on an orientation flight. He wanted to get a good look at the island, the blast site, the camps, and anything else he needed to be aware of—or that might pose a potential threat. They took off on that flight at 0830 on the morning of the 28th.
    At 1020, they were hanging around over the Bay of Ambon, waiting for clearance to land at Pattimura. Tatum was then in the right-hand commander’s seat, chatting with Valdez, who was in a jump seat behind him. The copilot, Bob Thornton, was at the controls.
    The flight path for fixed wing aircraft put the normal final approach over the villages of Hattu and Leke, west of the airport. Their Pave Low was south of that.
    As they waited, a C-130 was passing over Hattu (it was carrying medical supplies, they learned later), when Thornton cried out, shocked, “SAM!” and pointed to a pair of corkscrewing trails of smoke beyond and below the big plane.
    Valdez watched, fascinated, not sure what he was seeing ... But also wondering with a chill down his back if the missiles had been shot at them.
    “Christ!” Tatum groaned, turning away from Valdez to look. “Goddamn!” And then, “I’ve got it.” He took the controls, his hand on the throttle, shoving it forward.
    Meanwhile, in answer to Valdez’s fears, the corkscrews ended near the port engines of the C-130, instantaneously followed by twin flashes as their warheads blew. The starboard wing lifted, and then the aircraft twisted and tumbled out of the sky. As Valdez watched, transfixed, it plunged into the forest just off the coast road, two thirds of the way between Hattu and Leke.
    The Pave Low by now was traveling at high speed, 160 knots, heading for the spot where the twin corkscrews had emerged from the forest. Valdez saw an opening there, probably a yam patch some farmer had hacked out of the jungle.
    In addition to the pilot and copilot, Pave Lows are manned by two gunners, who operate a pair of 7.62 mm Gatling guns. A third Gatling, aft, is manned by the crew chief. These don’t give you heavy-duty firepower, but they make up for that (in most cases where you need them) by laying down a fast stream of lead. Gunners fire them the way firemen use a fire hose. One sweep will cut a man in two.
    As they hurtled toward the coast, Tatum called out instructions to his gunners, his voice clear, calm, precise, yet tense with rage: “Gentlemen, we’re gonna get the bastards that took out our C-130. Check out your guns, please, gentlemen.”
    This order was quickly followed by a series of clicks and snaps, as the gunners prepped their guns.
    By this time, Valdez was himself caught up in the rage he could feel swelling through the aircraft.
    Transport aircraft are vulnerable, and essential, in an operation like the one then underway. Without the air bridge, the relief effort would starve. Whoever had shot down the C-130 had wanted to threaten that. Why?
    At the same time, the United States Air Force takes threats to any of their aircraft very seriously. And even transports come equipped with protective measures—chaff, flares, and other tricks of the trade. In fact, the larger aircraft can move with surprising agility if they have to. Even they can dodge missiles (man-portable SAMs have short legs—their maximum range is about five km., but their optimal range is only one or two km.). Tragically, no one had expected such an attack. This was a bad guess. On the other hand, Valdez was thinking, if you shoot down a U.S. Air Force aircraft don’t expect the other cheek to get turned.
    A rack contained four M-4 carbines. He worked his way out of his jump seat and grabbed one, checking it over quickly to make sure it was ready to fire. It was. He placed himself to one side of one of the now open doors.
    By then they had crossed the coastline and were descending; Tatum was throttling down, starting a tight circle that had the little field as its center. It had taken the big chopper less than two minutes to cover the distance from the bay to the SAM site.
    The standard procedure for SAM shooters involves a quick in and out—shoot and scoot. And that was what the bad guys were doing. There were four of them, two shooters and two spotters, and they were hustling toward the jungle, maybe fifteen meters from its hope of safety (a triple-canopy forest wilderness covered the interior of the northern peninsula; only the coast was inhabited), when the Pave Low arced behind them. None of the four expected the cavalry to gallop over the hill that fast; and they all panicked. Three of them tried to put on a burst of speed; the fourth dove for the ground. It turned out that he made the best move. The Gatlings make a noise that has been described as the fart of the gods. Valdez listened, fascinated, to the gods farting, as he watched a laserlike stream of 7.62 mm projectiles cut through the three runners. The gunner then sent the briefest of bursts in the direction of the man on the ground, to encourage docility.
    The Pave Low made a couple of fast circuits around the field to make sure there were no other bad guys ... and that the three that were down were truly down. Then it settled to the ground, not gently; the two gunners and the crew chief, armed with M-4s and sidearms, leapt out, with Valdez following.
    Valdez headed for the fourth man; the others for the three nearer the forest.
    His had been hit ... not directly, it appeared, but by ricochets. He was still alive, and he was wearing the uniform of an Indonesian Army officer (a captain, Valdez recognized); an AK-47 lay where he had dropped it, not far from one of his hands, and a holstered pistol was at his side. He had been hit in the thigh and shoulder, and was in a great deal of pain, though the wounds weren’t life threatening.
    Valdez was a little surprised to find the man in uniform ... because of this very eventuality. Why would the Indonesian military want to proclaim responsibility for shooting down a U.S. aircraft? Did they have Saddam’s crazy chutzpah?
“Bangsat!” 114 Valdez called out to the other man in Indonesian as he approached, his carbine leveled. “Can you hear me?” he continued in Indonesian.
    “Yes,” the captain murmured.
    “Get rid of your pistol. And then give the Kalashnikov a good toss.”
    The Indonesian officer gave him a pained look, indicating his wounds.
    “I don’t give a ratfuck how much you hurt, motherfucker! Get rid of your weapons!” Valdez screamed out in English. Even so, the other man got the idea, and very delicately removed his pistol from its holster and flipped it away into the yam patch. He then crawled to the AK-47, struggled with it for a second, but managed to give it a heave.
    “Okay,” Valdez said, satisfied. He moved closer. “Now let’s see about patching you up.”
    As he said that, one of the gunners showed up to announce that the other three were truly and finally out of the picture forever. Then he went off into the yam patch, to find the discarded launch tubes. A few minutes later, he reappeared. “They were Russian SA-16s,” he told Valdez, then went over to give the same message to Major Tatum, who by this time was out of the Pave Low and checking out what had been wrought.
    Valdez, meanwhile, was thinking: Unless these bastards are acting on their own—not very likely—they have a cache somewhere in the jungle. If we find where that is, no more SAMs ... probably.
    Later, after they had clambered back into the helicopter, and the Indonesian had been safely stowed with his wounds patched up enough to allow him to be moved, Valdez took Al Tatum aside and cocked his head in the direction of the wounded man. “This guy needs to have a date with a friend of mine, Kumar, the JISF commander over here,” he said. “Do you think you can run me and the Indonesian back to Kota Ambon? I kind of think Kumar will take him into a room and shut the door while I go out and have a beer. When I come back, I’m pretty damned sure Kumar will be able to tell me where they have cached their other SA-16s.”
    Tatum gave him a tight, pleased smile. “Fine by me,” he said. “Can I join you ... for that beer? I hear they make a pretty good brew in Ambon.”
    “Sure thing.”
    By the time the Pave Low was lifting off from the yam field, Air Force traffic controllers back in Pattimura had already placed local airspace in high-security mode. A pair of OH-58D helicopters (all that were available at that point) were put on watch along the approaches to the airport. The OH-58Ds are FLIR-equipped, and armed with a variety of antipersonnel weapons (rocket pods and 50-caliber machine guns). They could reply to other SAM launches swiftly and decisively.
    In order to warn aircraft of actual launches, teams of ground spotters were sent out along the airport approaches.
    And finally, air traffic had to be slowed down, and everything coming in that was not essential (or low on fuel) had to be put off until after nightfall. That meant a slowdown on the air bridge, but that couldn’t be helped.
    Man-portable SAMs are simple beasts that do not work well at night. They are visually aimed and visually tracked. Darkness makes that difficult (darkness or bad weather cut vulnerability to such missiles by 80-85%). On top of that, the missile’s ability to home in on heat sources comes in the form of a simple sensor on the missile itself. There is no thermal-imaging capability in the aiming and ground guidance system, nor any kind of sophisticated radar guidance. All of these nice things come in packages that are too heavy for people on foot to handle. In other words, man-portable SAMs are nothing but simple bazooka-type systems with a heat-seeking nose. Even at that, they weigh in the neighborhood of fifteen kilos. That’s a big load if you’re walking.
    All this also requires some kind of central storage location.
    And that was a big reason why Carlos Valdez wanted to find where that was hidden.
    He was not wrong in thinking he would not have long to wait.
    RAAF Base Darwin
    Darwin, Australia
    28 December 2005
    Flying very long distances is hard work. You lose lots of water. You lose lots of electrolytes. You lose lots of time zones. You come out of the silver tube a dehydrated zombie, your body clueless about what the hell time it is.
    You need downtime—rest, rehydration.
    Rangers are mean, and they are tough. One big reason why they are trained to be in top physical condition is to give them the ability to get on an aircraft in battle gear and then get off it eighteen hours later and swarm out fighting. (These aircraft, it should be noted, do not come equipped with cute stewardesses, in-flight movies, or seats you’d want to sit in for more than about ten minutes.)
    That they can do that is a good thing. But they are also human. They’d rather not. And if they can, they’ll take a day or two off after a world-spanning flight to get their bodies back in synch. That’s what they did when they arrived at RAAF Darwin on 27 December.
    Meanwhile, their soon-to-be partners, the Tactical Assault Group of the Australian SAS, who had arrived at RAAF Darwin on the 26th, were busy building what looked like very crude stage sets—two-by-fours, butcher paper, canvas cloth. Special Operations in many ways parallel theatrical performances—performances with very high stakes. Carpentry, lighting, and stagecraft skills come in handy. Rehearsals are crucial. And if you are a special operator, the more time you have for rehearsals, the happier you are. (The bad guys at Entebbe gave the Israeli Special Ops guys three days to prepare. That rehearsal time sealed the bad guys’ fate.) What you want to have is mock-ups of your target (they don’t have to be elegant) that will allow you to experience and internalize spatial relations at your target, proportions, layout, exits, sight lines, lines of fire, routes and timing and locations of obstacles and hostiles. You want to also synchronize all the pieces of your own actions.
    So, while the 1st/75th Ranger Regiment rested, the Aussies built a stage set, representing the one-time Merdeka Aircraft Plant that was now the nuclear weapons storage site.
    On the 29th, the SAS TAG and the Rangers would start rehearsing together, with buildings on the base (like the control tower, for instance) doubling as likenesses of buildings at Bandung’s Husein Sastranegara Airport.
    The Rangers can take 99% of the airports in the world in twenty minutes. The SAS TAG expected to have the nuclear weapons and the Indonesian vice-president (assuming he was being held at the storage site) within a similar time frame.
    It would not be pretty. But it would be fast.
    Husein Sastranegara Airport
    Bandung, Indonesia
    1625 28 December 2005
    Radu Adil was confined in a small but comfortable room, which he correctly took to be underground. It was in fact about 100 meters from the hastily constructed storage vault for the nuclear weapons, and a few doors down a hall from a much larger room that served as a comms and C-and-C center. General Nusaution had been left in Jakarta to continue to act as spokesman, while the rest of the conspirators had retired to the greater safety of their facility at Bandung.
    At this moment he was being graced by the presence of the conspiracy leader, General Bungei, and Colonel Cancio. Bungei was in his fifties, portly and prosperous looking. Cancio was ten years younger and a good hand taller; and unlike his boss, he was fit and hard. Under other circumstances, Adil might have liked the man, and he might have been proud to have Cancio serve under him. It was difficult to understand why such a man had thrown in his lot with these thugs. Both men were dressed in BDUs. Cancio carried a leather folio case.
    Adil watched them both closely, searching for signs that might tell him something about what was going on outside his four walls and tiny bathroom.
    Meanwhile, his jailers had so far maintained the “official” fiction that he was their guest; and he had so far maintained an “official” blind eye to that. He had tried to preserve an “official” neutrality. He knew orders had been going out in his name (as interim president). There was no way he could stop them. He had even allowed himself to be photographed with Bungei. This was a calculated compromise. He hoped it would gain himself and his family time.
    On the other hand, there were circumstances that might compel him to sacrifice himself and his family. He was under no illusions. He expected to face one of those circumstances soon.
    Now what do they want? He wondered, as General Bungei settled into one of the two easy chairs that had come with the room. Adil took the other. Cancio remained standing.
    Like most Asians, Indonesians do not come quickly to the point. During his time in America, Adil had grafted onto his personality a measure of American impatience. His fears for his family magnified that. As Bungei went through his obligatory circling around and around, Adil churned. Though he endured the general’s courtesies with polite, yet stony-faced replies, he almost screamed inside: “Get on with it!”
    Cancio, a man of few words, looked on impassively.
    “I have a request to ask of you, Radu,” Bungei said, at last coming to the point of the visit, his face a mask of friendliness.
    “Yes?” Adil replied carefully.
    “We’re at a point in our restoration where the people of our country need a word of encouragement from a respected figure ...”
    “... Such as the interim president.”
    “Exactly. We would like you to address the nation. We would like you to reassure the people.” He brought his finger and thumb to a near touch. “We are on the very edge of success, my friend; we are that close.” He gave his hand a little flutter. “But we need someone ... of your high stature ... to bring our nation over that edge. A man of the hour is required. You can be that man.”
    Adil stared at the other man, his mind churning. “I’m not sure what you mean,” he said.
    “You will have the support of the CRR to assume the presidency. But we will, of course, require gestures of support on your part. The relationship could be mutually beneficial.”
    “And if I find that I can’t help you?” Adil asked, using all his strength of will to keep his voice casual and uncolored by the turmoil he felt. It was clear to him that the coup was not going well. If it had been, they would not have needed him for this.
    It was probably for such an eventuality that they had kept him alive.
How can I use that? he asked himself. How can I turn this to my advantage? ... Shall I agree to go along with them, and then say what I must say when I’m in front of the cameras? ... Of course not. They will tape the speech. If I try that, I’ll be dead in seconds.... No, not before they show me my wife and daughters as they rape and torture them to death.
    “I can’t imagine how you could refuse your nation in its time of trial,” Bungei said smoothly. “Yet the examples of Sutopo, Yani, Suwandi, and Dhani point toward the consequences of a negative choice. And there are other consequences.” He glanced at Colonel Cancio, who produced from his folio case a seven-by-nine photograph and passed it over to Adil.
    The photo showed his nineteen-year-old daughter, Reni, under fierce, glaring lights, standing naked and terrified against a featureless cinderblock wall, her hands behind her back, certainly bound. Adil had not seen his daughter unclothed since she was a child.
    The sight of her that way now seared his soul ... enraged him.
    There were no marks on her ... as yet. Their continued absence was clearly a condition of his future cooperation.
    Adil stifled the impulse to lash out. It would do no good (his eye had already caught Cancio’s hand resting casually yet alert on the gun holstered by his side). He also stifled the equally useless verbal abuse he wanted to scream out.
    He made his decision.
    The bastards had made another mistake. They had tried to push him to submit. Instead, they had pushed him toward resistance. Adil had seen through their pressure (which wasn’t hard to do) ... leaving Adil with a granite certainty: Reni and Suya and Nuri were dead. And so was he. In hours. Or days. Soon. They would not be allowed to live. Cooperation would only delay that.
    With that the case, honor won.
    “No,” he said quietly, his voice a near whisper. “I can’t join you.”
    “Do you want to elaborate on that?” Bungei asked, visibly surprised. Cancio, on the other hand, was staring at Adil with something like respect.
    “No,” Adil said. “I don’t think I have anything to add to that.”
    “Your choice will have consequences,” Bungei said, the surprise now melting into disappointment; beneath which was anxiety, and swiftly emerging from that was rage. He had been counting on Adil’s weakness. With Adil on their side, the CRR could win without having to rattle their nuclear sabers. Without him, they would have no other choice but to do that. And there was no telling what would come then.
    He decided to delay. It was a weakness, he knew—and so did Adil—but there was no helping it. He must have Adil, for the moment at least, on his side.
    “You should think for a time,” he said, cursing the man, and hating it that he needed him. “Think about your daughter. A pretty thing. Look at her.” He gestured at the photograph as he rose from his chair. “We’ll return later.”
    Adil picked up the photograph and tore it slowly into small pieces. The pieces fluttered to the floor like moths.
    Bungei and Cancio were out of the door before he had finished destroying it. The general’s face was rigid with fury.
    The United States Embassy
    Merdeka Square
    Jakarta, Indonesia
    2247 28 December 2005
    The Marine guards at the embassy were not happy. Earlier that evening, Indonesian Army troops had fired at rioters. Some of the shots had “strayed” and hit a corporal and a private. Both had been wearing flak vests, which worked out well for the corporal, but the private’s right wrist was shattered. The Marines had been ordered not to shoot back unless directly threatened, and this incident was officially an “accident” (though they suspected, rightly, that it was intentional), but that didn’t prevent the Marines from being pissed. They were not in a friendly mood toward Indonesians.
    When the Indonesian approached the Marine first lieutenant (his name was Kelleher), Lieutenant Kelleher tried to shoo him away. He did this automatically, and he wasn’t particularly gracious about it. At least not after two “You’ll have to come back tomorrow when the embassy is open” tries had failed to send the man away. He was just an ordinary-looking Indonesian, batik shirt, pitji cap, polite, patient.
    “Back off, motherfucker,” Kelleher commanded, making a “get lost” gesture with the butt of his M16.
    “My name is Widodo Suratman,” the man persisted. “May I ask you again to tell Colonel Anthony Meyer that I’d like to see him? Please tell him it is urgent.”
Yeah, Kelleher was thinking, like you want visas for your family.
    On the other hand, a contrary thought was beginning to intrude into his thinking: He began to see that this man was intelligent, and he had an air of authority. And if he really did have reason to see Colonel Meyer, then my ass is grass if I don’t tell the colonel about him.
    A few minutes later Suratman and Colonel Meyer were seated in the colonel’s office.
    “So what gives, Widodo?” he asked, glad to see the man ... glad to see that he was alive. He hadn’t put his chances as very high the last time they parted.
    “I must tell you this ... officially: The shootdown of your C-130 earlier today was the responsibility of the outlaws who call themselves the CRR. It was an Army operation. They inserted a SAM team to embarrass you. I hope they did not succeed.”
    “We had already figured that out,” Meyer answered. “But thanks for your concern. It will be noted.
    “We had a Pave Low,” he explained further, “on scene when they shot down the C-130. It took out three of them and managed to capture a fourth. He talked. What he said connected the attack with the CRR. It gives us justification to reply with force.”
    “Which you don’t need,” Suratman said softly.
    “No, not really, but it will firm up the nervous Nellies among the coalition partners.”
    Suratman nodded understanding, and then continued. “Now for the real purpose of my visit,” he said. “I told you before that the Air Force and the Navy would not back the CRR. That is true. I can also tell you that there will be no Air Force or Navy hindrance to SEAC movements. Or to military actions ... say, in the Bandung area, if that is contemplated.” He stared at the other with masterful impassivity.
    “Meanwhile, the CRR remain technically in control of the capital, but, in fact, the city is currently hardly a degree or two away from anarchy, and no one believes they can hold it. Bands of young people have been killing soldiers in less than platoon strength. And the Air Force has been interdicting Army reinforcements trying to move into Jakarta. The Army is increasingly isolated. The only strong backing they have is certain Army units ... but that will melt away in time.
    “They’ve made terrible miscalculations,” he added. “And they have misread the people of this country. After the initial shock, few believed their lies. No one who took the time to think about it believed their claim that the Christians stole the bomb. It was one big lie too many. No one believed in their legitimacy. The CRR is another big lie.
    “We will die unless we have the democracy, the freedom, the merdeka that is our right. Anything less is not a start-up.”
    “You mean a nonstarter?” Meyer corrected, with a smile.
    “A nonstarter? All right.”
    “So how desperate are they?” Meyer asked, his tone suddenly sharp.
    “You mean, I take it, ‘Are they desperate enough to use their nuclear weapons?’ The answer: ‘I don’t know.’ One can hope they will see reason. But with them reason has been in short supply.” He caught Meyer’s eye. “I hope immediate action will be taken by someone to neutralize those weapons.”
    Meyer did not reply to this.
    “One final word,” Suratman added. “I have received definite confirmation that Radu Adil is being held at the former aircraft factory near the airport at Bandung.”
    “I’m glad that he is alive.”
    “I must leave,” Suratman said.
    “Will you be safe? If you’d like, I’ll find a place for you here ... and your family,” he added, “if necessary.”
    “Thank you. No. I’ll be okay. And my family are safe now on Bali. I can be more useful outside.”
    “Well, then, good luck, Suratman. Selamat jalan.”
“Selamat tinggal,115 my friend.”
    During the time Widodo Suratman and Anthony Meyer were having their conversation, four vehicles left the embassy’s underground garage, at intervals of between five and fifteen minutes. The first was a Range Rover. The second was a sixteen seat minibus (a sign on its side read COUNTRY WALKERS in Indonesian and English). The third was an identical minibus. And the fourth was an old Mitsubishi Montero SUV.
    Half an hour later, the Range Rover was on the toll road to Bandung, a distance of about 120 kilometers.
    Bandung, Indonesia
    0530 29 December 2005
    The city of Bandung is set in a large valley surrounded by 2000+-meter-high mountains. The airport is on the northwest side of the city, just off the toll road to Jakarta. The lower slopes of the volcano Tangkuban Prahu rise a couple of kilometers north of the airport. Its summit is thirty kilometers north of the city. (It has not erupted seriously since 1969, but it fumes and rumbles.)
    If, like the two ODAs now enroute to Bandung, one wanted to view the airport unobserved, one could do worse than find a relatively inaccessible spot on the volcano’s lower slopes. There were disadvantages, of course (you were hoping for easy?). For example, the distances were on the long side: You might find yourself with a five kilometer sightline. On the other hand, five-kilometers is no more of a problem than five hundred meters for modern optics and thermal-imaging equipment. Consideration had been given to placing a series of TV minicams near the one-time aircraft plant (it was on the north side of the field), but that idea was rejected. The risk of their discovery, though small, was too great. No one in the plant must suspect that they would soon be the target for a number of nasty surprises.
    The SUVs and minibuses, driven conservatively, had started arriving in the Bandung area by 0130. An hour and a half later, they had deposited their passengers and equipment by the side of one of the roads up the mountain. An hour after that, the two ODAs (each of them a couple of men understrength, as it happened) had split into two teams of five men each and set about digging hide sites. They placed these at the comers of a rough-sided box, about 200 meters on a side.
    The idea was to get a clear and exhaustive two-day view of the workings of the airport and the bomb storage depot. One team would keep track of air traffic. A second would watch ground traffic at the terminal and its facilities. A third would watch the goings and comings at the former aircraft factory—entrances, exits, loading docks, security arrangements around the building and on the roof, and the like. And the fourth would put together a “thermal map” of the facility. Human beings, for instance, shine brightly in infrared, even at a distance of five kilometers. Getting a thermal picture of the inside of the plant was more problematic. Still, sleeping spaces, dining areas, work areas, command-and-control and communications areas—one could make a pretty fair guess about the locations of such places by examining closely the thermal signatures coming out of the building.
    But far more important: Nuclear weapons need to be kept cool. Heat is a normal byproduct of highly radioactive materials. A five-pound lump of plutonium is warm to the touch.
    A number of critical parts within a nuclear device must be able to move in very precise ways if the device is going to work as designed. If you heat up these parts too much, they expand and don’t move the way they should. Ergo, you want to keep the bomb chilled.
    Keeping bombs chilled is not hard to do. Refrigeration technology has been around a long time. It works by heat exchange. That is, cool air comes out of one end of, say, an air-conditioner, and warm air comes out of the other.
    But, of course, a good thermal imager can tell you a lot about what is going on in such a system. Even better, in an emerging Third World country, where you don’t always have absolute confidence in the power grid, you will probably want to set up a separate generating system to power the refrigeration system that keeps your nuclear weapons cool. And for solid practical reasons, you’ll probably place this generator not far from the vault where you are keeping your weapons. Generators generate a lot of heat. That means—all other things being equal—if you can find the generators, you’re pretty damned close to the bombs.
    Palau Ambon
    2200 29 December 2005
    It had not taken the Indonesian captain long to reveal the location of the SAM cache. He was not eager to suffer for the Committee for the Restoration of the Republic.
    Earlier that day (during the morning of the 29th), another four-man SA-16 team had tried to take out a Chinook carrying a NEST team to the blast site. The Chinook drivers (unlike the C-130 pilots the day before) proved to be ready for the twin corkscrews of smoke that headed their way, launched from about three kilometers to their port rear. Flares were dropped and the Chinook took violent evasive action. The NEST people got shook up (one dislocated a shoulder), but the missiles missed.
    Unfortunately, this time there were no MH-53Js or OH-58Ds around to follow up, and the bad guys successfully slipped away into the rain forest.
    Later, a Pave Low, operating at 2,000 meters, made a pass near the spot the Indonesian captain had identified as the SAM cache location. The Pave Low’s FLIRs indicated that he had been telling the truth.
    At 2200, a Chinook carrying ODA 142 was hovering behind a hill near the cache site. They were accompanied by an OH-58D and a Pave Low. Meanwhile, an AC- 130U Spectre was at 2,500 meters, circling the cache site, setting up to fire its 105mm short-barreled howitzer. This is, quite simply, one hell of a weapon to fire from an airplane. It’s like placing a howitzer on the best possible high ground ... high ground you can move where you need it most.
    At 2202, the Spectre started firing its 105mm. It stopped firing at 2208 to allow the smaller birds to go in for a closer look. There wasn’t much to see except flames and smoke, punctuated by the occasional fiery burst of a cooking SA-16 warhead. But just to be on the safe side—and because they also wanted to get in a few licks of their own—the guys in the OH-58D launched a series of rockets from their pod at the peripheries of the jungle camp, while the Pave Low hosed it down with their Gatlings.
    At 2210, having located a decently clear landing spot half a kilometer from the cache, the Chinook set down so ODA 142 could clean up what was left.
    They found nothing undamaged, and no one alive. There were fifteen shredded corpses and thousands of shards of weapons and gear. Body parts were everywhere. It was as though somebody had put everything in the camp through a big snow blower (with a missing blade).
    It was, of course, possible that one or two of them had managed to escape into the jungle when the pounding from the Spectre started, but they were toothless and clawless. They wouldn’t cause any more harm.
    Meanwhile, there was intelligence to be gathered, and Valdez and his ODA did that for the rest of the night. Much as he and his guys hated what these people had done to Americans, and were prepared to continue doing, it was still a ghastly duty that the ODA would have preferred not to do.
    Just after dawn, they trudged back to the Chinook carrying bags of “evidence” that the analysts would do their thing with.
    In the Chinook, Valdez was sick at heart. He was also a realist and a warrior, who understood the consequences of war. Those guys had been enemies. They deserved to be treated with extreme violence.
    Yet the killing and the destruction of war never failed to yank hard at his insides. Those guys had wives, girlfriends, children. Somebody would be weeping for them the way Karen might be weeping for him if the situation was reversed. It was insane, but that was the way it was.
    And besides—these moments aside—he loved the job.
    Husein Sastranegara Airport
    Bandung, Indonesia
    0100 31 December 2005
    Nuclear weapons do funny things to people. Or at least that was the message Captain Chuck Verbalis, the ODA 163 commander, had gotten during a briefing at the U.S. Embassy in Jakarta by Dr. Ben Sobel, one of the NEST team from Nevada. (There would be a NEST component during the final grab of the weapons.) “When people have nukes as close neighbors, they go nuts” was the way Sobel had put it. “That’s going to be particularly the case when people come into possession of nukes who aren’t used to the damned things ... not that anyone will ever get used to them.
    “What you can expect to see is some really strange things. The villains are going to get overprotective. They’re going to look real paranoid. It’s like the ring in Tol kein’s books. The longer you have it, the more power it has over you. If they could wear the fuckers around their necks, they would.
    “You’d think having nukes would make you feel mega-macho,” he went on. “It doesn’t work that way. You look for enemies everywhere. It’s like showing a million-dollar diamond necklace on the New York subway. You don’t know who is going to snatch first.” From his accent, it was clear Dr. Ben Sobel had done a lot of time on New York City subways. “So the nuke guys will go for overkill where protection is concerned.”
    After two days at airport, Verbalis had concluded that Sobel had been right. He and the others on the teams surveilling the airport had expected the CRR generals to present a low profile ... They’d expected them to let the civil airport run normally, and to keep their security measures more or less invisible. “Why call undue attention to yourself?”
    But things didn’t work out that way. As Sobel had predicted, the generals got increasingly paranoid (Verbalis called that the “Sobel Factor”). They closed down the airport to civilian traffic and brought in a battalion from Kostrad, Indonesia’s 15,000 man, well-trained and well-equipped strategic reserve. The Kostrad battalion secured the perimeters of the airport, set up AAA and SAM batteries, and fortified the former aircraft plant.
    Two days of observations had yielded the following information, which had been relayed by SATCOM to the mission controllers at the FOB in Darwin (the mission itself was now called Operation Merdeka):
    Guarding the airport against air attack, there were:
        • Five batteries of Swedish-made Bofors 40mm/L70 pompoms, with four guns per battery. (These were a direct descendant of and very similar to the Bofors-made pompoms everyone has seen firing from ships in World War II movies. They are still very much in use all over the world ... because they still do the job very well.) The Bofors fire time, impact, and proximity fused ammunition, and are useful against both air and ground targets. Two batteries were placed near each end of the main runway, and the fifth was placed closer to the Merdeka factory.
        • At each end of the main runway was also placed a British-made Rapier SAM battery. Rapiers are purpose-designed for airport defense. They’re day and night capable, all-weather, and effective against aircraft flying at low to medium altitudes. Each battery has three or four launcher units, with each launcher holding four ready missiles (which are eight feet long). These require a direct hit to kill a target (there is no proximity fuse), but they are very accurate.
    On the ground:
        • One battalion (three companies plus a headquarters—approximately 600 men) from the elite Kostrad division. Two of these companies, on twelve-hour shifts, guarded the plant perimeter in platoon-sized units (a platoon was on the roof) from fortified (usually sandbagged) positions. The Kostrad troops were billeted in a tent camp set up about two hundred meters north of the former Merdeka factory.
        • At strategic and fortified positions around the airfield had been placed .50-caliber machine gun positions, as well as lighter machine guns. It was clear to the ODAs that these light machine guns could fire at aircraft as well as ground targets.
        • The Kostrad garrison was also augmented with six French-built AMX-13 light tanks (armed with a 105mm cannon and light machine guns), positioned just outside the plant perimeters.
        • A number of quickly improvised obstacles had been placed within the perimeter fences of the plant—primarily twelve medium (5-ton) trucks loaded with concrete blocks and scrap iron to limit access to the loading docks and main plant entrances.
        • There were sniper positions on the terminal buildings and control tower across the runway, and on hangars and other buildings on the plant (north) side of the field.
        • Along the main runway was a string of six medium trucks, also loaded with concrete blocks. If needed, they could be driven onto the runways to act as obstacles to landing aircraft, and quickly disabled ... The Indonesians actually used a belt-and-suspenders approach: They could remove the ignition rotors (easily reinstalled if the trucks had to be moved again). But if more permanent obstacles had to be created, they had attached 20-kilogram demolition charges (TNT with a burning—not electrical—fuse) to the truck beds beneath the concrete and scrap.
    Inside the plant:
      • Thermal-imaging systems are not X-ray vision, yet they provide an approximation of that. That is to say, the ODAs’ thermal imagers could not provide “guaranteed” exact locations for the nuclear weapons storage vault or for Vice-President Adil, but analysts armed with the ODA-provided thermal imaging information and the building plans provided by Widodo Suratman could make reasonably accurate estimates, based on generator and air-conditioning signatures and other heat concentrations. These estimates were downlinked to the Australian SAS TAG.
    Meanwhile, a pair of B-2s had taken off from CONUS, armed with JSOWs (AGM-154 Joint Standoff Weapons—1000-pound glide bombs with INS/GPS guidance) and JDAMs (Joint Direct Attack Munitions—2000-pound GPS-guided high-explosive bombs). The JSOWs—standoff munitions—can be released from a safe distance, glide over their target, and spew out cluster munitions—a mix of explosives, incendiaries, and shrapnel. JSOWs are very useful against antiaircraft positions and other more or less soft sites. JDAMs, on the other hand, can be used against more hardened targets, bridges, and buildings. Both are carried on a rotary launcher within the B-2’s bomb bay.
    During the previous two days, ODAs 163 and 168 had carefully mapped antiaircraft positions at the airfield with PAQ-10 Ground Laser Target Designators, which had been linked to the GPS system. These coordinates had been uplinked to FOB Darwin, and eventually downlinked to the B-2s. The bombs on the B-2s were then programmed with this information. It made them accurate within three or four meters.
    The coordinates of several other strategic positions on the airfield were also noted and uplinked.
    The “grab and snatch” that was the essence of Operation Merdeka presupposed an essential sequence of actions (which were downlinked back to ODAs 163 and 168):
        • The antiaircraft positions at Husein Sastranegara had to be neutralized.
        • The runways had to be cleared.
        • Defensive ground positions had to neutralized and obstacles cleared.
        • And, in general, the defenders had to be placed in a condition of confusion, havoc, and panic. The closer to total paralysis the better. Thus, an early goal was to create shock and mayhem ... That was about to happen.
    During the attack, the ODAs would provide fire control and instant BDA (Bomb Damage Assessment).
    By 0100 on the 31st, the two ODAs had packed their nonessential gear and cleaned up their positions (you’d have to look hard after they left to tell that they had been there). The vehicles that had driven them up from Jakarta two days earlier were now waiting for them a short distance away on one of the mountain roads.
    They could not leave yet, though. They had loose ends to tie.
    Just after 0100, Chuck Verbalis and his companions went silent, listening intently. Seconds later, they heard what they were listening for—the faint but distinctive whooshing sound of JSOWs, almost instantly followed by the bright flashes of cluster munitions at the ends of the Husein Sastranegara runway. (Firecracker pops, traveling at the speed of sound, arrived later.)
    RUBICON, INC, BY LAURA DENINNO
    “Scratch two Rapier sites,” Verbalis said to himself. Moments later, the Bofors gun sites met the same fate. And moments after that, he observed more flashes over the Kostrad camp to the north of the Merdeka plant. Verbalis counted on perhaps two to three hundred troops to be sleeping there. They would sleep a very long time. (Later 266 Kostrad dead were counted.) When the firecracker pops ceased, discreetly murmured cheers came from the guys in the ODAs.
    As all this was happening, Verbalis’s comms sergeant was passing a running report to the B-2s, to the second wave of Spectre gunships and Pave Lows waiting nearby, and back to FOB Darwin by SATCOM.
    After the JSOWs came the JDAMs. It was not a long wait. There were flashes, followed seconds later by low crackling rumbles, and the airport control tower was a pile of shards and rubble, the terminal building was a smoking ruin, and hangar and administrative buildings on both sides of the field were “no longer functional.” That meant that most Kostrad sniper positions were likewise “no longer functional.”
    That success was communicated to the various players and controllers.
    With their primary job done, the B-2s were released from their primary role. They would now destroy local communications facilities and approaches to the airport—by taking out a selection of bridges and overpasses (this would hinder potential reinforcements).
    Once the B-2s had moved out, a pair of AC-130U Spectre Gunships (at 3000 meters) and three MH-53J Pave Low helicopters (closer to the ground) began taking out targets selected by the two ODAs with their PAQ-10 GLTDs.
    Verbalis watched as the Spectres’ 105mm howitzers and 20mm Gatlings demolished machine gun positions and AMX-13 tanks. Soon the tanks were immobilized and burning, while machine gun positions ceased to be operational. Once these were neutralized, the Spectre howitzers focused on the trucks poised to obstruct the runway. Meanwhile, the Pave Lows hosed the roof of the former aircraft plant, its perimeter defenses, and anything else that caught their gunners’ interest.
    At 0110, the Spectres and the Pave Lows checked fire, and the Pave Lows pulled back to the airfield perimeters. This was in order to deconflict the airfield airspace. It was also the ODAs’ signal to go passive. From that moment on, they no longer had an active fire control function, though they would continue to report BDAs.
    At 0114, Verbalis turned his attention to the former Merdeka Plant. Over it hovered three Pave Lows, from which the Aussie SAS TAG (a 36-man company split into three 12-man teams) were fast roping down to the factory roof, each of them carrying a noise- and flash-suppressed H&K 9mm submachine gun.
    Though Pave Low Gatlings had earlier eliminated rooftop security, a handful of Kostrad troops had rushed up to the roof after the initial ruckus ended and were getting off shots at descending SAS troops (hitting one man, Verbalis learned later). But this proved to be only a brief inconvenience for the SAS guys. TAG H&Ks quickly cut the bad guys down. (The SAS man’s wound was not life threatening, but it proved to be serious enough to take him out of action. He was helicoptered back to the CVBG, which was now in position south of Java.)
    Once they were on the roof, the TAGs split up. One team remained on the roof, for security and to give the Ranger company fire support; the other two raced down an airshaft stairs for the cellar.
    From then on, Chuck Verbalis had to wait. He consoled himself with the thought that if they made a major slip up, his end would probably come instantly and painlessly.
    The wait was by no means without incident: Even as the TAGs were roping down from their Pave Lows, three companies of Rangers, augmented by armored HMMWVs equipped with .50-caliber machine guns, 40mm machine guns, and TOW missiles, were parachuting onto the airfield. Two of the companies, and all of the HMMWVs, fanned out to establish security and prepare the runway to receive air traffic (their biggest problem was clearing used parachutes—these could create a big problem for C-130 props). The third Ranger company launched an assault on what was left of the opposition around the Merdeka plant. The side of the plant closest to the airport’s main runway consisted of a huge, high-ceilinged hangar-type shed, where finished aircraft had once been assembled. The Rangers attacked toward the shed’s big sliding doors.
    Verbalis watched a brief skirmish with the remnants of the Kostrad resistance. Then charges were placed on sliding doors. There was a flash, followed a few moments later by a dull whump. And the Rangers were inside.
    By 0135, it was essentially over. One or two bull-headed snipers remained to be suppressed, but aside from these, the Kostrad forces had either surrendered or were dead.
    At 0145, a NEST C-130 arrived, and the NEST team, accompanied by a Technical Escort Unit (TEU) from the Defense Non-Proliferation Agency at Fort Belvoir, Maryland, who handled security, were escorted into the plant by Rangers. Half an hour later, a HMMVW emerged through the shed doors and drove out to the NEST C-130. Verbalis examined it closely. There was a pallet on its truck bed. The pallet contained a gray, lethal-looking lozenge, about a meter in length.
    Verbalis was a Catholic who did not pray often. He prayed then.
    After three other warheads were safely transported onto the C-130, Verbalis gave the order for his guys to move out. A half hour later, ODAs 163 and 168 were headed north toward the coast, and then west on the coast highway to Jakarta. Ever the “quiet professionals,” they had slipped in and out of their hide sites as stealthily as B-2s.
    Later, Verbalis learned that the TAG had found Radu Adil in a cell (converted from an office) not far from the large room used by the CRR leaders as a temporary command and control center. This was an “action central” that was both close to the nuclear weapons (another example of the “Sobel Factor”) and safely out of the chaos that Jakarta had become.
    Though the guards posted outside Adil’s cell had been prepared to kill him—and had expected to do that—the execution order never came. The TAG put 9mm shots into them before they even realized that the men in black who suddenly appeared in the corridor were not friends.
    Adil himself was visibly uninjured, but spiritually much shaken. His wife and daughters had each been shot in his presence the day before the American and Australian assault (their unmarked graves were discovered by Rangers later that morning).
    The choice he had made had been the right one, but its consequence had been the murder of his family. The pain of that would remain with him for the rest of his life.
    In due course, Generals Bungei, Nusaution, and the other conspirators were rounded up. Within weeks, all of the conspirators had been tried and executed.
    Colonel Cancio (whose job it had been to order Adil’s execution ... Adil never learned whether this lapse was deliberate) was never found.
    Adil privately believed that he had survived.
    At 0230, the NEST C-130, containing the nuclear weapons, lifted off for Darwin. The next day the weapons were placed in a C-17 bound for the USA ... and an inspection by expert scientists.
    Kota Ambon
    1100 25 December 2006
    Carlos Valdez was a man of strong emotions, usually held under professional control. But it was hard for him to do that this Christmas morning. He and several hundred others—the President of the United States, President Adil of Indonesia, the commanding general of SOCOM, the commander of Special Forces Command, various other participants, American, Australian, and Indonesian (including his friend, now Brigadier General Kumar), and (far from insignificantly) Karen and his two boys—were waiting in Taman Victoria, a park in downtown Victoria, for the ceremony to begin.
    The big shots, including Kumar, were on a platform beside a draped statue. Speeches were made, which Valdez ignored. The two presidents then together un-draped the statue: It was bronze and showed several figures—suffering Indonesian children and an Indonesian mother being helped by an American Special Forces and an Indonesian JISF soldier. Valdez had seen the statue, of course, before the dedication (he had come to Ambon three days before—three days of partying with Indonesian friends), but it never failed to move him. And he was choked up now.
    He was even more choked up when the President of the United States called him up to the platform. The Indonesians evidently wanted to give him some kind of decoration. Karen gave his hand a squeeze as he set off through the very unwelcome applause.
    Shit! he thought. Why the hell do they want to do that?
