---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0006.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["police", "novel", "book", "lee", "mystery", "writer", "csi", "question", "might", "read", "writing", "detail", "procedure", "equipment", "know", "thing", "many", "year", "started", "ny", "would", "however", "detective", "chicago", "department"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0006html

---


FOREWORD
 FOREWORDI recall exchanging “helloes” with Lee Lofland at several conferences for mystery writers and fans over the years, but I didn't contact him for help that he had offered till I started writing my CSI: NY novels. I wish I had contacted him earlier. Details of police procedure in my novels would have been more accurate. More important, however, is that those details would have contributed significantly to bringing my work more fully to life.Chicago was covered. I have a friend, a homicide detective, in the Chicago Police Department who provides me on a regular basis about what is going on in the world of crime in Chicago, and much is always going on, usually bizarre and fascinating.When I had a question about police procedure in Bremen, Germany, I met with the Chief of Police of Bremen, had my fingerprints taken and a photo of me is now on file in Germany.When I have questions about police procedure or forensic investigation in Sarasota where I live and write about, I call a detective or the Crime Scene Unit in the Sarasota County Sheriff's Office.However, when I started writing the CSI: NY novels, I kept coming up with problems, both procedural and forensic beyond the scope of my then current human resources. I was stuck at one point about what the very latest in DNA equipment might be. Adjunct questions about DNA abounded. I remembered Lee's offer and got in touch with him. His answer came with clarity and detail down to the name and manufacturer of equipment that the police might use.More recently, I had the police in a book investigating a murder scene on top of a roof in Manhattan. The problem was that they had to do it in the middle of the worst storm in New York City history. I thought the answer might be simple. I know that in other novels I could write around any difficulty I might encounter. However, I could not do this with a CSI novel. Again, Lee's response was dead-on perfect. I used what he gave me verbatim. There were other things in that and subsequent CSI and other novels that Lee provided for me, always within a day of my asking any question I had.The book you are about to read contains many things I already knew, but far more things I did not know or that I have gotten wrong in the past. I read it from prologue to epilogue taking notes and planning to incorporate Lee's information about everything from police department uniforms to fingerprint equipment in my next book. I read it because it is so damned fascinating. I read it because I want to get it right. I owe it to law enforcement agencies and I owe it to my readers.There are many books in my garage that purport to be what a mystery writer like me needs. Most of those books, now withering under the Florida heat and humidity, were either woefully inadequate or simply wrong. This book, even before it has come out, is now my bible for writing anything about law enforcement. It will rest next to my computer in easy reach.One of my nephews is a police officer in Aurora, Illinois, and has been for many years. As soon as the book is published, I'm sending him a copy. Who knows? The information in it may land him a promotion.— Stuart M. Kaminsky is an Edgar Award-winning author of more than seventy mystery novels and a Grandmaster of the Mystery Writers of America. He also has screenplay credits for six produced films, including Once Upon A Time in America, and was a writer on the Nero Wolfe Mysteries television series.
