---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0019_split_001.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["court", "attorney", "judge", "case", "defendant", "jury", "officer", "trial", "may", "defense", "also", "criminal", "suspect", "witness", "police", "evidence", "time", "many", "must", "called", "normally", "state", "prosecutor", "prosecution", "clerk"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0019split001html

---


12
TELL IT TO THE JUDGE: COURTS AND THE LEGAL PROCESSIn our American criminal court system, prosecuting attorneys have a duty to search for the truth. Defense attorneys have a duty to zealously represent their clients. Judges have a duty to ensure that attorneys and witnesses follow the law and at times be a referee in courtroom battles. Jurors have the toughest job of all — to use all their senses including common sense to separate truth from untruth and untangle webs of confusion to result in a just verdict.— THE HONORABLE PAT MOELLER, CITY COUNCIL MEMBER AND FORMER BUTLER COUNTY, OHIO, ASSISTANT PROSECUTING ATTORNEYThe U.S. court system can be quite complicated and confusing to a layperson. It can also be quite overwhelming to someone who's been accused of committing a crime. Once a person crosses the line between right and wrong and makes the decision to do something against the law, the wheels of justice automatically begin to spin. There's no turning back. Sure, the offenders can say, “I'm sorry, and I won't ever do it again,” but once the system is in motion, the crooks must … tell it to the judge!THE STRUCTURE OF A STATE COURT SYSTEMThe structure of an individual court system varies from state to state, but the idea remains the same — lower courts try minor (misdemeanor) offenses, while higher courts handle the more serious felony cases. Appellate courts, including the State Supreme Court, sit at the top of the organization to oversee and hear all appeals stemming from the lower courts.MAGISTRATE's COURTIn some court systems a magistrate is the first court official to see the defendant. Magistrates are specially trained judicial officers who have the authority and power to issue arrest warrants, search warrants, and civil warrants; set bail; commit suspects to jail; issue temporary detention orders (TDOs) for suspects requiring psychiatric evaluation; and administer oaths.Magistrates are generally appointed to their positions by the chief judge of the area where they're employed. In the case of the state court system in the accompanying illustration, the chief judge of the circuit court would appoint a magistrate. Since the chief judge has the authority to appoint whomever he chooses, the appointments sometimes go to his close friends. Each district in a state has a chief magistrate who supervises the activities of all other magistrates within that particular area.In some small rural areas, magistrates work rotating schedules on an on-call basis. This system means that someone (usually a police dispatcher) calls the on-call magistrate from home to report to the law enforcement agency that's requesting her services. In these areas, some of magistrates work on a part-time basis. During the hours when they're not serving in their official capacity as magistrate, they work regular jobs, such as plumbing, driving a tow truck, and farming. Part-time magistrates are required to leave their regular jobs to attend to their magistrate duties whenever they're called. It's not unusual to see a magistrate enter a police station to sign a search warrant dressed in work clothes, smelling like cattle. It's also not unusual for a magistrate's court to be held after normal working hours so the magistrate or mayor may work their normal daytime jobs.All fines and court costs are a source of revenue for the local community.MAYOR's COURTMayors' courts are normally held in small communities, such as villages and towns, to relieve caseloads from higher courts. They're also a great source of revenue for the local community.These informal courts are presided over by the mayor of the municipality. It isn't a requirement that the mayor be a licensed attorney. The presiding mayor is authorized by local law to try cases, such as traffic offenses, minor misdemeanors, minor drug offenses, DUI/DWI cases, and charges involving animals (barking and biting dogs, etc.). A mayor in these courts is even authorized to commit offenders to jail.JUVENILE COURTIn most states, a juvenile is a person under the age of eighteen. Special courts have been established to handle cases involving juveniles. These courts also handle legal matters for families, abused children and spouses; consent for medical treatment of neglected juveniles; juveniles who are accused of traffic violations and crimes; children in need of supervision; and, in some cases, runaways and truancy. In addition, these courts handle cases concerning child support. There are no juries in juvenile court; all cases must be heard by a judge.When children are taken into custody by the police, they're brought before an intake officer or a magistrate to determine if the juvenile needs to be held in a detention facility. (Some juvenile probation officers double as juvenile intake officers.) The child may only be held for a short period of time, normally up to seventy-two hours, until he's brought before a judge for an official detention hearing. The purpose of a detention hearing is to determine if the child should remain in custody. Unless the child poses a threat to himself or others, the court almost always attempts to release him into the custody of a parent or other responsible family member.Children who have been abandoned, abused, or neglected, or whose parents have given up their custody rights, are appointed a guardian ad litem, an attorney whose main duty is to protect the legal interest of the child and to see that the child is properly cared for. The attorney is also assigned to represent the child in court proceedings.Children who commit heinous crimes, such as murder, may be tried as adults; however, some states set a minimum age of fifteen for the point at which the charge may upgraded to an adult offense.Juvenile judges have a wide range of discretion when it comes to sentencing juvenile offenders. They take into account the offender's prior criminal record, her environmental conditions, her relationship with her parents or guardians, and the circumstances surrounding the crimes she's been accused of committing.Juvenile courts make every effort to protect the privacy of children by holding private hearings and sealing the court records of children. Most courts expunge the court records of children after they've reached adulthood unless the record contains felony convictions. A felony conviction is sometimes held in the offender's record for as many as twenty years.GENERAL DISTRICT COURT (LOWER COURT)Lower courts have many purposes. They also have many names, depending upon the area of the country they're located in. Some areas of the country, such as Florida, refer to their lower courts as county courts. The lower courts in Virginia are called general district courts. No matter the name, the cases heard in these courts are all quite similar. Judges in these courts may hear both civil and criminal cases. They also hear cases involving traffic-related offenses, such as speeding and reckless driving.Civil cases tried in a general district court typically involve relatively small amounts of money. In many areas that dollar amount may not exceed ten thousand dollars. Some locales have special courts for such cases, called small claims courts.During the course of their duties, police officers sometimes witness property damage or physical harm to a person, and they can be called as witnesses to testify on behalf of either the plaintiff or the defendant. Testifying in this type of trial isn't a favorite task of police officers. They sometimes feel as if they're selling out to the wrong side if they're required to provide statements in a civil proceeding, especially if they're called on to testify for someone they see as less than law-abiding.Lower courts, such as Virginia's general district courts, hear criminal cases involving only misdemeanor offenses (punishable by sentences of less than one year in prison). Even though felony cases (punishable by one or more years in prison) aren't tried in lower courts, these courts conduct all preliminary hearings for felony cases to determine if enough evidence exists to justify trying the case in a superior court. If a lower court judge determines that probable cause exists, the case is considered “certified” and is sent to the grand jury for possible indictment (a formal, written accusation of a criminal offense). If indicted, a defendant is tried in a higher court, such as Virginia's circuit court. A grand jury hearing usually takes place weeks or months after the preliminary hearing.The defendant may or may not be allowed to remain free until the case is heard by the superior court, depending on the discretion of the judge. If the defendant's been allowed to remain free on bond since his arrest and has met all conditions set by the judge at his bond hearing, the judge presiding over the preliminary hearing will more than likely allow him to remain free.Misdemeanor cases don't require preliminary hearings or jury trials; all decisions are made by the trial judge. Misdemeanor trials are heard on the date that was determined at arraignment (the formal reading of the charges by the court to the defendant).At the conclusion of a misdemeanor trial, the judge pronounces his findings of either guilt or innocence and imposes a sentence and, if applicable, a fine and/or probation. If the judge imposes a jail sentence, the court bailiff or other courtroom security officers immediately take the defendant into custody. The defendant is held in a small holding cell outside the courtroom where he'll eventually be picked up by sheriff's deputies and transported to the county jail to serve his sentence.California superior courts are an exception to the rule. Judges in these courts hear all cases — felony, misdemeanor, traffic, and civil.CIRCUIT COURTCircuit courts derive their name from the days of the Old West, when each town had a separate jail and court. Judges were assigned to an entire territory and rode either by horseback or wagon throughout their entire circuit, hearing cases. The judges eventually tired of riding the circuit and a single court was established, usually in the county seat. The sheriff of the county then had to bring the criminals to the centrally located courthouse. In many parts of the country, the circuit court system is still in effect.Circuit court judges in the state of Virginia, for instance, are elected to office by both houses of the general assembly. In other areas of the country, the general public elects circuit court judges to office.As with the lower courts, the higher courts have many names. Florida and Virginia try felony cases in their circuit courts.Higher courts, such as circuit courts or superior courts (the two names can be synonymous), receive their cases when a lower court certifies a felony case, a grand jury hands down an indictment, or when a prosecutor bypasses a preliminary hearing and takes her case directly to a high court. (This process is called a straight indictment. It's a ploy the prosecution uses to prevent the defense from hearing state's evidence during a preliminary hearing.) When a circuit court clerk receives a case, she places it on the docket to be tried by a circuit court judge and jury.Circuit courts also handle all civil cases with dollar amounts exceeding the monetary limitations of the lower courts (dollar amounts exceeding the ten thousand dollar limit). Circuit courts also hear all appeals from the lower courts.COURT OF APPEALSThe court of appeals, or appellate court, provides appellate review of all traffic and criminal cases heard in circuit courts; in other words, they review all the judgments of the circuit courts. An appellate court is normally presided over by a panel of judges, typically three or more, who are appointed in state courts by the governor of the state. (The president of the United States appoints federal judges.) Defendants don't normally testify before an appellate court. Attorneys for both the defense and the prosecution are given a specific amount of time to present their arguments for the panel of judges. After these arguments, the appellate judges review all trial transcripts, attorney briefs, and testimony. They take this information into consideration and then render their decisions at a later date. These decisions are called judgments and are delivered in writing. It's also a normal practice for appellate court judges to write a corresponding paper, called an opinion, which explains in detail the court's reasons for its decision.STATE SUPREME COURTState supreme courts have original and appellate jurisdiction; however, the primary function of a state supreme court is to review appeals from lower courts. The supreme court also reviews death penalty cases, cases involving attorney disbarment, and hearings to determine if prisoners are being held legally (attorneys can file a writ of habeas corpus if they feel their clients aren't being held lawfully). Supreme court justices also review other writs, such as a writ of mandamus, which is a mandate for the holder of an office to perform his duties, such as in the case of a judge who's refused to rule on a specific case. In this instance, a state supreme court can order the judge to issue a ruling.Supreme courts also have the authority to remove judges from office.THE CRIMINAL COURT CAST OF CHARACTERSA criminal proceeding can be a long process that involves many people, including judges, jurors, attorneys, police officers, experts, witnesses, security officers, and stenographers. A trial is a multifaceted procedure involving many hours of groundwork by all parties involved. The pretrial activity alone can sometimes take weeks, months, and even years of preparation. The entire complicated process normally revolves around a single person, the star of the show — the criminal defendant.THE DEFENDANTAll criminal cases begin, of course, with the commission of a crime. As a result of an investigation, police locate the perpetrator of the crime and make the arrest. The moment they place the suspect under arrest (remember, an arrest is when a person is in police custody and no longer feels free to leave) is the moment the court process begins. Every movement and action by both the police and the suspect will now be part of a permanent record. Note, though, that a suspect isn't considered a “defendant” until after the arraignment, at which point he officially becomes a part of a criminal court proceeding. (We'll take a closer look at arraignments.)Suspects who've been taken into police custody are handcuffed and searched to make sure they're not concealing weapons, drugs, or other items of evidence. The suspects are then placed into the back seat of a squad car and driven to a police station or county jail. In the case of an arrest made by a federal law enforcement officer, such as an FBI agent or a U.S. Marshal, the suspect is normally taken to a federal processing center within a nearby federal courthouse or federal court complex.A deputy sheriff places his weapon inside a lockbox prior to entering the booking area.Officers escort their suspects inside their respective agency to begin the booking procedure, called processing by many police officers. Prior to entering the booking area, officers remove their weapons from their gun belts and lock them inside a wall-mounted lockbox. This security measure prevents the suspects from having access to a loaded gun. officers remove the lockbox key and place it inside their pockets until they're ready to leave the processing area.The next order of business might be for the police officers to interview and interrogate their suspects. It's standard procedure with most police departments for officers to try to obtain a written confession from all suspects, especially those involved in major crimes, such as rape, robbery, and murder.All statements offered by the suspect at this time should be recorded, transcribed, and then entered into a file that becomes a permanent record. These files are later provided to the prosecuting attorney. Some smaller departments still write all statements and confessions in longhand. Those that do should have the suspect write and sign the document himself to avoid any confusion in the courtroom or accusations that the officers falsified the statement.If the suspect has recent wounds such as scratches, cuts, and bite marks, police officers use this time to photograph him. These photographs are provided to the prosecutor and can be especially useful as evidence during the trial if the suspect was involved in a crime where a physical altercation took place, such as a rape, assault, or murder.When the police officers have completed this stage of their investigation, they turn their suspects over to jail or detention center officers, who then begin the booking process. The suspect is required to empty his pockets and surrender all personal property including jewelry, belts, money, and shoestrings. A receipt is issued to the suspect for all property that he's turned over to the booking officers. The suspect is issued jail clothes — normally used (but clean) boxer shorts, used socks, used shoes, used T-shirts, and a used colored jumpsuit, normally orange or black-and-white striped, that's clearly marked with identifying logos or lettering of the detention center or jail.Jail officers record the suspect's personal information, such as his name, address, all known aliases, next of kin, medical history, and prior criminal history. officers also make note of any scars, marks, and tattoos that he may have on his body. Tattoos and scars from branding sometimes indicate gang activity. Jail and prison officials make every effort not to place rival gang members into the same cell or cell block.For the safety of everyone involved, prisoners and jail staff alike, the suspects are asked if they have any known enemies incarcerated within the facility where the booking is taking place. If an enemy is housed at the facility, officials make every effort to keep the rivals apart.With the paperwork complete, the suspect is moved into a fingerprinting area where he submits copies of his fingerprints, which become part of the jail's permanent record. Larger departments use the computerized Live Scan system, which is capable of transmitting fingerprints directly into the national Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System. Smaller departments still use the standard ink-and-ten-print fingerprint-card method of recording fingerprints. Those that still use the cards must make two sets of prints — one for their local records and another that's mailed to the FBI for manual entry into the national database.After the suspect's prints have been recorded he's allowed to clean his hands with a waterless hand cleaner. Most departments keep a one-gallon, pump-type container of orange-scented cleaner on hand for such use.Suspects are photographed in the standard, two-picture mug shot fashion — a full face shot and a profile. After the photography has been completed, the suspect is brought before a judge or magistrate to establish the proper amount of bail for the specific crime.THE DEFENSE ATTORNEYPolice detectives almost always attempt to conduct their interviews before the accused has an opportunity to discuss the case with his lawyer. Why? Attorneys advise their clients not to talk about their involvement in any criminal matters. This advice greatly reduces the officer's likelihood of obtaining a confession.A suspect in a criminal case has the right to have an attorney with him during questioning, but that doesn't mean a lawyer is going to drop whatever she's doing and run down to the county jail to attend a detective/crook interview session. In fact, suspects aren't normally appointed an attorney until their first court appearance. Many never actually meet their court-appointed attorneys until the day of their trial.There are three types of defense representation: a court-appointed attorney, a privately retained defense attorney, and self-representation. It is the duty of the defense attorney to represent a client and protect her from miscarriages of justice, police wrongdoings, and illegal prosecution. The defense attorney must protect the client from illegal search and seizures, and illegal uses of force. The attorney must also provide a sound defense, or argument, in response to the prosecutor's case presented against the defendant.The Court-Appointed Defense AttorneyTo qualify for the services of a court-appointed attorney, most states require a defendant to be indigent or otherwise unable to pay for the costs of a court proceeding, including the costs of investigations and laboratory testing. A judge may also consider the severity of the defendant's crime, since a more severe crime may involve a more complex and expensive defense. Court appointments are made on a case-by-case basis.To assist a judge in making the determination, the defendant is required to complete a form that's much like a credit application. The defendant must list his income, all monthly expenses, the number of dependents, and spouse's income. The court normally doesn't include the income of family members when making its decision whether or not to appoint an attorney. The judge uses the form to make his final decision.If, at any time during the trial, it's discovered the defendant has improperly reported income or expenses, he'll either be required to retain an attorney at his own expense and/or made to reimburse the court for the expense of the court-appointed attorney. Criminal charges may also be filed for the deliberate attempt to defraud the court.Court-appointed attorneys are generally chosen from a pool of attorneys who attend court each day waiting to be assigned to a defendant's case. The judge usually chooses the attorneys on a rotating basis and, therefore, shows no favoritism to any one lawyer. Most defendants would like the opportunity to choose a well-established attorney with a proven track record of winning cases; however, they're not allowed to pick their court-appointed attorneys.Sometimes judges allow an offender to refuse a particular attorney because of a conflict of interest with the attorney. For example, the attorney may have previously represented the victim in the case, or the attorney may herself be a victim of the crime.Brand-new, unknown criminal defense attorneys don't normally have customers beating down their doors begging for their services. Because of this fact, many attorneys on the rotating list are fresh out of law school and use the appointment process to gain experience and to build a potential list of clients. Court appointments are an almost guaranteed source of income until the new attorneys become established in the community.In some states, court-appointed attorneys earn approximately fifty dollars per hour for each hour spent in court (some cases last only minutes) and forty dollars per hour for research and other out-of-court time, which is usually only a few hours per case.Attorneys who are appointed to represent defendants in capital murder cases — cases where the defendant is facing the death penalty — are normally required to spend a great deal of time on the case, due to the intricacy of research and procedure. Two attorneys are always appointed to represent a defendant in a capital case, and their hourly fees can mount up quickly; therefore, most states have a cap on the amount that can be paid to court-appointed attorneys. For instance, in Ohio, that top fee is ten thousand dollars. As with any commodity, this top fee rises with inflation. Any additional expenditure requires the defense attorneys to submit an application to the court for consideration of an increase. It's then up to the judge to decide if the requested increase is justifiable.In severe cases, such as with a murder case, the court-appointed defense has the option to petition the court for additional expenses to hire private investigators and for the private forensic testing of evidential items. All testing and investigations conducted by the police and state laboratories are done on behalf of the prosecution; the defense doesn't have access to these facilities and investigators. Expenses for these additional services normally range between one thousand and five thousand dollars. All psychological testing, if it's ordered by the court to determine the competency of the defendant, is paid for by the state.The Privately Retained Defense AttorneyMany defense attorneys in private practice work alone or in small firms, with perhaps only one or two other partners. Attorneys who don't rely on court appointments as a principle means of income have the freedom to pick and choose the clients they prefer to represent. This means that their caseloads aren't normally quite as heavy as those of a court-appointed attorney; therefore, the private attorney can devote quite a bit more time to preparing a defense for her client. As with any other job, the more time spent on it, the better the end result.Private attorney fees are considerably higher than the fees of their court-appointed counterparts. A privately retained attorney can reasonably expect to receive no less than thirty thousand dollars to defend a client in an average murder trial. In fact, most defendants can expect to spend close to fifty thousand dollars for an attorney with a solid record of achieving acquittals and not guilty verdicts for her clients.High-profile/celebrity clients and offenders who require the services of more than one attorney can expect to pay millions in legal fees. They must also be prepared to spend similar amounts of money in expert witness fees.Attorneys in private practice sometimes employ private investigators. Many times these private investigators are former police officers, such as retired detectives and FBI agents. These investigators perform much of the legwork for the attorney. They interview witnesses, conduct investigations, and examine police documents and reports. They even talk to the police investigators who are actively working on the case. A former police officer is more apt to garner information from the investigating officer than a defense attorney. Many police officers feel that talking to the defense attorney is similar to talking to the enemy.Most defense attorneys require that a defendant pay a retainer fee before they'll begin working on their case. Retainer fees are sometimes in the thousands of dollars, and clients often have to borrow the money from friends and family members. Many attorneys insist that they be paid in full before the trial has concluded.Since legal fees can mount up quickly, defense attorneys have been known to secure a lien against a defendant's personal property, such as a house or land, to ensure he meets his financial obligations. If the client can't pay the final bill, the lawyer will sell his property, take her fee from the proceeds, and deliver the balance (if any) to the client.Defense attorneys are permitted to visit with their incarcerated clients. They're not subjected to normal visiting protocol and may conduct their visits outside of normal visiting hours and in private, away from the eyes and ears of jail and prison staff. Wealthy clients have sometimes paid their attorneys to visit them just to have extra contact with the outside world. Some attorneys have been caught smuggling contraband, such as cigarettes, alcohol, drugs, and messages about illegal activities from family and friends.Self-RepresentationLawbreakers aren't required to have an attorney represent and advise them during their criminal proceedings; however, it's highly advisable for them to do so, especially if they face possible jail or prison time.Even with the possibility of spending many years behind bars, some defendants insist upon acting as their own attorney. Reading mystery novels and watching reality TV doesn't provide the average person with enough knowledge to defend himself in a court of law. In fact, relying on a work of fiction as a means of legal research can lead to disaster. It takes an appropriate education and many years of experience to offer a proper legal defense.Defendants who feel the need to represent themselves do so for various reasons. Some have been represented by attorneys in the past and feel they received inadequate service. They think they can do as well or better than the ineffective attorney. Some can't relinquish the control of their future, so they elect to handle their own trials. Others simply don't have enough money to hire an attorney but have income that's too high to justify the court appointing an attorney for them.The reasons for acting as one's own attorney may seem plausible in the beginning, but as a trial progresses, reasons to hire a skilled attorney soon become apparent. There are countless legal loopholes and rules of law that lay-persons aren't privy to — rules and information that could mean the difference between going to prison or not.Many times a judge won't allow a defendant to represent himself, especially in cases where the outcome may result in substantial prison time, or when the death penalty is a sentencing option. In these instances, a judge orders a court-appointed attorney to represent a defendant, even against his will and protests.THE PROSECUTORIt's the duty of the prosecutor to protect the public from wrongdoers and to see that criminals are punished for their crimes. It's the responsibility of the prosecutor to ensure that the police have done their jobs properly and lawfully, and not to present any case before the court that's without merit.After the police have completed their investigation, the officers present their entire case to the prosecuting attorney. They provide the attorney with a copy of their case files and in many instances they meet with the prosecutor to discuss, in detail, all aspects of the case. They may even hold a mock trial to practice how the officers should respond to questions. However, not all cases require an in-depth, in-person meeting between the officers and the attorneys.Quite often only the major cases, such as murder, rape, and robbery, receive such intimate attention. In fact, many times police officers don't get a chance to speak with the prosecuting attorney about a minor case (shoplifting, drinking in public, simple assault, minor drug possession) until the day of the trial. Even that meeting may take place just moments before they're to take the stand. Unfortunately, there are just too many cases flowing through the courtrooms to justify anything more.It's the prosecutor's job to compile the evidence that's been presented to her and bring about criminal charges and proceedings against the accused criminal. The prosecutor presents evidence during the trial, presents arguments, makes motions and objections, and may even take part in the actual investigation of the crime by interviewing potential witnesses and examining evidence. The job is a tough one and requires an extensive knowledge of criminal law.In many counties and cites, a prosecutor is an elected official who's charged with representing the government in criminal proceedings. In some areas, such as with the U.S. government, federal prosecutors are appointed. Federal prosecutors, called U.S. attorneys, receive their appointments from the president of the United States, and they serve at his pleasure.The title of state and other local prosecuting attorneys depends upon the rule of the locale where the office is held. In Commonwealth states, such as Virginia and Massachusetts, the prosecutors are called commonwealth's attorneys. Other areas may use the title district attorney, state attorney, city attorney, or county attorney. They're essentially all the same position and have similar duties and responsibilities.The office of the prosecutor may have a large enough caseload to justify hiring other attorneys who assist the chief prosecutor with her duties. The attorneys she employs are called (again, depending upon the area) assistant U.S. attorneys, assistant commonwealth's attorneys, assistant state's attorneys, assistant city attorneys, assistant county attorneys, or assistant district attorneys.The chief prosecutor assigns individual cases to her assistants. She may employ one attorney who specializes in sexual assault cases, while another is best suited for homicide cases. A third may handle all drunk driving cases, and another may prosecute only cases involving juvenile offenders. Some chief prosecutors take it upon themselves to prosecute all high-profile cases.Prosecutors sometimes visit a crime scene to get the feel of the events at the time they took place. This not only enables them to paint a better picture for the jury, but it also gives them the opportunity to instruct police officers as to what evidence they'd like to see collected and preserved.THE POLICE OFFICERPolice officers are subpoenaed to testify in a criminal case as are any other witnesses. During the trial they're questioned by the prosecutor and cross-examined by the defense attorney. Their duty is to provide truthful testimony regarding their involvement in the case in question. They normally attend the trial dressed as they dress while on duty — patrol officers in full uniform and detectives in suits. While waiting for their individual cases to be called, police officers may be called upon to provide security for the courtroom.THE BAILIFFA bailiff is a court employee who is the choreographer and manager of a court proceeding. It's the bailiff's job to ensure all aspects of the trial are carried out smoothly. He may or may not be a sworn police officer; however, many bailiffs are sworn peace officers and have the authority to arrest and detain lawbreakers.The bailiff calls court to order, maintains security and order within the courtroom, and sometimes has the responsibility for swearing in witnesses. He's responsible for escorting defendants to and from courthouse holding cells, escorting witnesses to and from the witness stand, and handing exhibits and evidence to witnesses, attorneys, jury members, and the judge. During the duration of a trial the bailiff attends to the needs of jury members. He may be required to transport sequestered jury members to and from their hotel, and he may also be required to pick up and deliver meals to the jury members.A BAILIFF's CALL TO ORDERAll rise.Hear ye, hear ye, hear ye. The General District Court of No County, USA, is now in session. The honorable judge Always Wright presiding. All those having pains or suits to prosecute speak now or forever hold your peace. May God save this honorable court. Be seated, please.THE COURT REPORTERA court reporter is responsible for recording each and every word that's said during a court proceeding. A court reporter must be properly trained and certified. The training to become a court reporter can vary, but most training periods normally last from two to four years. Upon completion of the training, a skilled court reporter can expect to earn between twenty-five and sixty thousand dollars annually depending on the area where they're employed.Court reporters are expected to record, at minimum, approximately 225 words per minute. Recording such vast numbers of words so quickly and accurately requires the use of a stenotype machine, which allows the reporter to press several keys simultaneously. Various combinations of keys represent different sounds, words, and phrases. The machine, which is actually a computer, automatically transfers these sounds and phrases into written words.When a trial is complete, the reporter prepares a written transcript of the proceeding, which becomes a permanent part of the court record.THE CLERK OF COURTThe clerk of court is an elected official with an enormous responsibility. The office of the clerk generates and maintains all records and paperwork for each civil and criminal transaction within her jurisdiction.For criminal cases the clerk's office processes all misdemeanor and felony paperwork (warrants, etc.); generates jury summons; issues subpoenas; prepares court dockets; prepares for arraignments; files all motions and warrants; and collects, manages, and maintains all fees and fines paid to the court.In civil proceedings, the clerk's office is responsible for receiving, filing, and managing all paperwork related to personal injury suits, property foreclosures, judgments, and business-related lawsuits.Clerks' offices also maintain records regarding all domestic disputes, such as legal separations and divorce proceedings. The offices issue and record marriage licenses, restraining orders, marriage annulments, and child custody suits. Some county and city clerks of court can perform legal marriage ceremonies.Many clerk's offices are equipped with Live Scan fingerprint technology that enables them to conduct background investigations of employees for schools, employers, coaches of youth teams, and so on. The office charges a small fee for this service.The amount of paperwork generated by a clerk's office is enormous and grows with each passing year. According to Butler County, Ohio, County Clerk of Court Cindy Carpenter, the number of criminal cases increases at a rate of 12 to 15 percent per year, yet her operating budget increases at the much lower rate of approximately 3 percent each year. Spillover of crime from neighboring Cincinnati, Ohio, has an impact on Butler County's crime statistics, much like all other counties, cities, and towns bordering large metropolitan areas.Ms. Carpenter oversees a workforce of seventy employees throughout a network of countywide satellite offices. Her staff, like many clerks' offices across the nation, is highly skilled and well educated. Many of her employees have advanced education degrees and extensive experience in the criminal justice system. Others have backgrounds and degrees in bookkeeping and accounting-related fields. Entry-level personnel employed in a clerk's office can expect to receive a salary of approximately seventeen thousand dollars annually. The salary increases with experience and with the level of the position held within the office. The salary of the clerk of court is a fixed salary mandated by the state for which the clerk is elected. The salaries vary depending upon the locale.The clerk of court has the responsibility for collecting certain fees for the sheriff's office, such as fees for levies, warrant and subpoena services, jury summons services, mileage for serving writs, and court orders. She also collects fees for services performed by the county sheriff's office, such as receiving prisoners, calling witnesses, taking the prisoner before the court, and discharging prisoners. The fees for the sheriff's services vary from locale to locale, but when charged and collected by the clerk, they become part of the court costs that must be paid by the defendant. Fees can include:Calling each witness to the witness stand — $3.00Taking the prisoner before the court for a hearing — $5.00Mileage for summons and writ service — $1.00 for the first mile. $0.50 for each mile thereafterAdministering an oath — $3.00Summonsing a juror — $6.00Serving an arrest warrant — $10.00Serving a writ of possession (repossession of property) — $60.00In many courts across the country, the clerk of court sits behind the bench alongside the judge. In these areas it's usually the clerk of court who administers the oath to, or swears in, all witnesses. The clerk also prepares the court docket (schedule of court cases) and calls each case from the docket. The clerk of court reads the jury's verdict aloud at the end of the trial.THE GRAND JURYA grand jury is a group of people chosen from the general population to serve the court. It is the grand jury's duty to examine evidence and listen to testimony for the purpose of determining whether there's probable cause to formally charge an offender with a crime.Grand jury proceedings are secret, informal hearings held prior to trials involving felonies. The only evidence that's presented to the members of the grand jury is evidence that's been gathered by the prosecutor. The defense isn't allowed to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, or ask questions during a grand jury hearing. In fact, the defense isn't even allowed to attend. A grand jury proceeding is a totally one-sided event.During a grand jury proceeding, the prosecutor may present physical evidence, such as DNA testing results and fingerprint evidence. She may also summon police officers to testify. When all the evidence has been heard, the members of the grand jury vote to indict (charge with a crime) the offender or not.A decision of “true bill” means the grand jury's decided there's enough probable cause to indict. A vote of “no bill” means that the prosecutor didn't present enough evidence to go forward with the case, and no charges can be filed against the offender at this time.Grand juries almost always indict. The chances of obtaining a true bill are so great that most law enforcement officers consider the grand jury process a slam dunk for their side.THE JURYDefendants have the constitutional right to be tried by an impartial panel of their peers called a jury. A jury is a group of people (usually twelve) whose duty is to listen to all factual evidence that's presented during a trial and then render a verdict. They may also be called upon to set an appropriate punishment for the defendant.Jurors are selected at random from local citizens. They're normally chosen through electoral or motor vehicle registrations. Those selected must serve unless they can provide the court with a just reason why they can't. Some of the reasons that jurors may be excused from serving are poor health, work-related issues, and financial hardship. Police officers, other criminal justice officials, and convicted criminals may not serve as jurors.In the event of a trial by jury, the jury is selected ahead of time through a process called voir dire (pronounced vwar dir), which is an examination process that allows both the defense and the prosecution to question each potential jury member and to determine his suitability as a juror. Each side is allowed to eliminate jurors who may be biased or otherwise harmful to their case. After the jury has been selected and sworn in (promising to serve honestly, listen to all the evidence, and make a decision using only the facts presented), the members are seated in the jury box — a separate seating area in the front of the courtroom away from spectators and other court participants. The attorneys present evidence from the trial directly to the jury as well as to the judge.At the conclusion of a trial the jury meets in secret to decide the fate of the defendant. These secret meetings are called deliberations. During the deliberation process jury members elect a leader and spokesperson for the group called a jury foreman.When their decision has been reached, the jury foreman sends word to the judge, who orders court to return to session. The jury foreman provides a written copy of the jury's decision to the clerk of court, who reads it aloud. After the verdict has been read, attorneys for both the prosecution and defendant normally ask the judge to poll the jury. Jury polling is simply asking each member of the jury if the verdict that was read aloud was indeed his decision.At the conclusion of the polling the judge excuses the jurors, thanks them for their services, and excuses them from further duty. The judge then orders everyone in the courtroom to remain standing until the jury has left the courtroom.Jury SequesteringIn the case of a jury trial, sometimes the judge feels the need to sequester the jury. Jury sequestering prevents jurors from hearing information that hasn't been introduced as evidence. It's also used to prevent media influence over jurors.Sequestered jury members must stay in the same hotel, eat their meals together, and have no access to the media. They may not discuss the trial with anyone, including family members.At the end of each court day, court security personnel, such as sheriff's deputies or the bailiff, transport a sequestered jury is transported to a hotel.Security is normally provided for the jury during their stay at the hotel and while they're attending meals. Security is also in place to prevent the jurors from having outside contact with anyone.THE JUDGEEveryone is familiar with the man or woman sitting at the raised wooden desk in the front of the courtroom. Those men and women dressed in black robes are, of course, judges. They're the gatekeepers of a courtroom. A judge listens to all evidence presented by both the defense and prosecution; she makes legal rulings regarding whether evidence is admissible, and — during a bench trial (a trial without a jury) — decides the fate of the defendant by determining guilt or innocence. The judge ensures that all rules of the law and the court are properly adhered to by all parties involved. During a jury trial, a judge instructs the jury in all laws pertaining to the evidence they've just heard.To make their decisions in a bench trial, judges rely on testimony from expert witnesses and examine articles of physical evidence. They must also draw on their own life experiences to assist them in their decisions. For example, a judge who once worked part-time as a bartender during college could more easily determine the truthfulness of a defendant in a murder trial who's currently employed in a local nightclub.Confessions play a big role in a criminal trial, but they don't automatically mean that a defendant is guilty. A judge must look at all facts surrounding confessions, such as police actions (intimidation and coercion) and the emotional state of the suspect at the time of the confession (depression, mental retardation, etc.).Judges must also consider the treatment of non-English-speaking defendants at the time of their confessions. Many people born outside the United States speak English fluently; however, not everyone who speaks English can read English. In fact, there are still many people who can't read or write at all, in any language.Many police officers speak only one language and assume suspects who speak English also understand the English written word. In these instances, suspects are often handed a written statement that was transcribed as a result of an interrogation. They're then asked to sign the document, and many do quite readily without knowing what they're signing.Many police agencies employ interpreters to assist them in understanding non-English-speaking suspects. Confessions taken through an interpreter sometimes still lose key words during the translation process; therefore, many courts require the entire conversation to be recorded. This allows the defense to object to any inconsistencies.Judges face many challenges, and one of the biggest problems facing judges is the overwhelming number of cases they're expected to try. To keep up with the ever-increasing workload, many judges are forced to work without a break during the day. Many of those judges who do manage to find time for a moment away from the bench allow themselves only a few minutes for lunch.My twenty-minute interview for this chapter with Judge Matthew J. Crehan of Ohio took place during a brief lunch recess. The judge kindly answered my questions between phone calls, thumbing through law books, and fielding questions from his clerk and bailiff. Between these many interruptions the judge managed to eat his lunch — half a sandwich and a small cup of Jell-O he'd brought from home. Then he was off for another five or six hours of administering justice. This scenario is typical all across the country. A judge's work day is a hectic day to say the least. A courtroom is a constant flurry of activity.Another hurdle facing the judges of today has been labeled “The CSI Effect.” The CSI Effect is the direct result of jury members — and sometimes even attorneys — relying on popular TV shows as a standard for learning about scientific analysis and other crime scene procedure. Shows of this nature tend to give members of juries a false sense of expectation. Scientific testing is excellent; however, nothing's perfect. Crime scene investigation techniques, tools, and laboratory results assist judges in making their decisions, but judges don't always rely on physical evidence as a means for determining guilt or innocence. Sometimes, for whatever reasons, laboratory test results must be excluded during trial, and judges must look to other areas of evidence.The position of judge is an extremely commanding one; however, it can also be an extremely lonely and isolated one. Judges often find friends and other attorneys treating them differently once they've received their powerful appointments. Many times the intimidation felt by those who were once close to the judges is due to what some in the legal community call “judge's disease” or, more commonly, “robe-itis.” Robe-itis occurs when an individual judge feels superior to others and shows it.THE TRIALA criminal trial actually begins long before the parties involved step into the courtroom. Indictments are handed down from the grand jury; the suspect is arrested; attorneys are appointed or retained; and meetings with witnesses and experts begin.The suspect is also required to submit to questioning and certain testing by court officials. The process starts with a pretrial investigation — the judge's first glimpse into the life of the suspect.PRETRIAL INVESTIGATION AND SUPERVISIONMost courts require that a pretrial investigation of the suspect's background and criminal history be conducted before her trial commences. In instances such as these, a pretrial officer is assigned to the suspect. The officer meets with the suspect soon after her arrest and asks questions concerning the suspect's relationship with her parents, spouse, children, and other family members. The officer probes into other areas of the suspect's past, such as elementary, high school, and college performance; church and civic organization involvement; employment history; ties to the criminal community; and past criminal conduct.During the time the suspect is on pretrial supervision (which lasts until the trial is over), she may be required to submit to drug and alcohol screenings. She may also be asked required to undergo a mental health evaluation by a psychiatrist or psychologist.At the end of the pretrial period, the pretrial officer prepares a written report for the court to review. The court may use the report for determining bail possibilities, and it's used for determining an appropriate sentence at the end of the trial.ARRAIGNMENTThe suspect's first appearance in court is for arraignment — to have the charges formally read to him by the court and to have a date set for trial. The law requires arraignment hearings for incarcerated suspects to be held as soon after a person's arrest as possible. In most states, a suspect can normally expect to be arraigned within forty-eight hours, excluding weekends. If a suspect has been released on bail, his arraignment could be held many weeks later.During the arraignment, the suspect is asked to state his preferences regarding an attorney. If she doesn't already have an attorney, she may ask for a court-appointed attorney or announce that she chooses to represent herself. Privately retained attorneys normally accompany their clients to an arraignment.Judges may also increase or decrease previously set bail amounts during an arraignment, and the suspect is asked to enter a plea of either guilty or not guilty. After the arraignment, the person is no longer considered a suspect. She's now considered a defendant in a criminal proceeding.BailBail is an amount of money that the court accepts to allow defendants to remain free until their court cases have concluded. A bail bond is the written agreement between the defendant, the court, and/or a third party, such as a bail bondsman. The bond agreement promises that the defendant will appear in court. If he doesn't appear, the money that was posted as bail is automatically forfeited to the court.Courts will also accept a property bond, if the value of the property is equal to or greater than the monetary amount of the bail and if the property owner has enough equity to equal the amount of the bail.Quite often, defendants don't have enough cash money or collateral to meet their bail requirements; therefore, they must employ the services of a bail bondsman. A bail bondsman charges a nonrefundable 15 percent of the total bond amount. The bondsman then posts the full amount of the defendant's bond with the court.The full responsibility of ensuring that the defendant appears in court now rests upon the bail bondsman. If the defendant doesn't appear for her hearings or trial, the bail bondsman forfeits the full amount of the bond to the court. The same holds true for family members who have posted a property bond for a defendant.Some locales have an option that allows defendants to post their bail directly with the police. The amount of bail is set by a predetermined bail schedule based upon the severity of the crime.If a defendant has no ties to the community where he has committed his crimes (no family, no job, no home) or, if for any other reason, the judge thinks the defendant is a flight risk, he may order him held without bail.A judge may also determine that a defendant poses no risk and may release him on his own recognizance (O.R.). All that's required of the defendant in this instance is that he signs a written promise to appear in court on the each of the dates specified. If he doesn't appear in court on the designated date, the judge will issue a bench warrant for his arrest. A bench warrant is a warrant that's issued by a presiding judge.A judge might also choose to impose certain restrictions as conditions for a defendant's bond, such as curfews, not having any contact with the victim of the crime, and submitting to alcohol and drug testing. If at any time the defendant doesn't meet the bond conditions established by the judge, the bond may be revoked. When this happens, the defendant is immediately taken into custody and held without bond until his trial. Additional felony charges may also be filed against the defendant if he doesn't appear in court as scheduled.At the conclusion of the defendant's trial, all bond money paid to the court is returned to the person who posted it if the defendant has met all his court appearance requirements. To release the bond, the judge must file a court order. In some locations, this order is called an entry-releasing bond.In the case of the federal court system, there's no predetermined bond; each defendant must be brought before a federal magistrate for a bond hearing. Federal bond hearings are held only during daytime business hours, so an offender arrested at night by a federal law enforcement officer is normally held in a jail cell until the following day. If he's arrested on the weekend, which begins on Friday night, he's held in a jail cell until the following Monday. It is an old law enforcement trick-of-the-trade for officers to make a point of arresting someone whom they've had a particularly difficult time with on Friday afternoon. By doing so, they ensure the criminal will have to remain in jail without bail for an entire weekend. At the conclusion of the hearing, then, the defendant is either allowed to go free on bond or is immediately taken to jail.Appointment of AttorneyDuring the arraignment, the clerk of the court calls each case on the court docket (the list of cases to be heard on any given day), and, if a defendant isn't using a privately retained attorney or defending herself, an attorney from the rotating sideline pool of lawyers is summoned to the bench. (Attorneys aren't normally appointed at the time of the initial arrest and questioning. If a defendant requests an attorney at that time, officers simply cease their questioning until an attorney has been appointed). The attorney is assigned to the case and to his new client. At this moment, the defendant is introduced to the person who will represent her during her quest for freedom. This may also be the only opportunity she has to speak with her attorney prior to court day.Due to their extremely excessive caseloads, court-appointed attorneys are sometimes forced to discuss the defendant's case with her for the first time in the hallways of the courthouse, mere moments before the case is to be tried. Obviously, with no real preparation by the attorney, the defendant stands little chance of winning the case.After the defendant is either appointed an attorney or has retained a private attorney, the judicial process can begin. The defendant's constitutional right to a speedy trial must be observed, so the defense and prosecution must agree upon a date for trial. The accused and his attorney must be allowed ample time to prepare an adequate defense, and the prosecution must be allowed ample time to conduct their investigation, evidence examinations, and analysis.A trial date isn't set in stone, and each side may request a continuance of the proceedings, if needed. The judge may grant a continuance for many reasons, such as the need of additional investigation time by the defense or the prosecution, illness, conflicting attorney schedules, or newly discovered evidence.PRETRIAL MOTIONSMany times, before a trial begins, attorneys for both the prosecution and the defense make several requests to the court. These requests are called pretrial motions, which may be made at any time prior to trial. There are many types of pretrial motions, including:Motion for discovery: a motion used by both sides (the defense and prosecution) to learn what information and evidence the other side plans to present during trial.Motion for continuance: a motion that asks for a delay or postponement of an upcoming hearing or trial.Motion to suppress: a motion normally used by the defense to eliminate a particular piece of evidence or statement.Motion for change of venue: a motion used to ask for a change in the location of a trial.Motion to dismiss: a motion normally used by the defense to ask for the dismissal of a court case, usually based upon a total lack of evidence.A trial judge listens as each attorney presents her reasons for having a particular motion granted. The judge also listens to the opposing attorney list the reasons why the motion should be denied. At the conclusion of the arguments the judge decides whether or not to grant the motion.With the preliminary hearing and pretrial motions complete, the judge sets a court date for the trial. Continuances are still permitted for just cause. Subpoenas are issued for each witness whose presence is required for both the prosecution and the defense. When all loose ends are tied up and neither of the parties requires additional continuances, a final trial date is set. The defendant and his attorney must decide upon having a jury trial or a trial by the judge.THE TRIAL BEGINSOn the day of the trial, the courtroom bustles with activity, much like an arena where a stage production is about to take place. The day actually begins in the wee hours of the morning in prison or jail, sometimes several hours away from the courthouse.The star of the show, the defendant, is normally awakened by corrections officers (unless he was allowed to remain free on bond) around three in the morning and told to dress and get ready for court. He's placed in handcuffs, leg shackles, and waist chains and then loaded into the back of a sheriff's office van for the trip. A sheriff's deputy hands the defendant a brown paper bag containing two boiled eggs, a slice of stale bread, and a single-serving size carton of juice — his breakfast.Upon arrival at the courthouse, the defendant is escorted by sheriff's deputies to a holding cell that's usually located in the rear, or in the basement, of the court facility. The holding cells are sometimes filled to standing room only with defendants waiting for their turn in court. The cells may or may not contain a toilet; if they do, it's in plain view of all the other defendants. Sometimes, the defendants must wait for several hours before they're called. Those who are still waiting at noon are normally served a bologna and cheese sandwich and a carton of fruit-flavored juice.A prisoner's view from inside a courthouse holding cell.Security for the courts falls under the bailiwick of the local sheriff's office. The sheriff assigns deputies to work metal detectors and to guard prisoners within the courtroom. In some jurisdictions a sheriff assigns a deputy to serve as bailiff.The tables in the front of a courtroom are reserved for the prosecuting and defense attorneys. The table to the left of the judge is for the prosecution and her assistants; the defense team works from the table to the judge's right. Witnesses in a criminal trial are normally sequestered in a witness room outside the courtroom. This act of seclusion prevents witness contamination and influence of their individual testimony by statements made in the courtroom, or from other people involved in the case. The bailiff or an assistant escorts each witness from the witness room as the clerk of the court or judge calls them to the stand.Court begins with the bailiff calling the court to order and then announcing the name of the sitting judge. The judge enters from a rear door leading from his chambers (his private office and library area).When everyone has taken a seat and the court comes to order (everyone is still and quiet), the clerk calls the first case and the judge asks if the attorneys for both the defense and the prosecution are ready to proceed. The lawyers reply with an affirmative response, or possibly a request for another continuance or other motion. At this point a judge rarely grants another continuance.If the defendant is in custody, a sheriff's deputy escorts him from the holding cell to the defense table. If he's not in custody and has been allowed to remain free on bond, he rises from his seat in the courtroom to take a place at the defense table beside his attorney.It's not uncommon for jail inmates to be in the courtroom without restraints. Most judges require the removal of all shackles prior to trial. Some courts believe if a jury sees a defendant in handcuffs and leg irons, their decision may be prejudiced, causing them to render an unjust guilty verdict.Court SecurityDeputy sheriffs who are in charge of courtroom security are not always certified police officers. They attend a special course of study in an academy designed for jailers and/or courtroom security persons. The training is not as in-depth or as intense as police officer training. Jailers and courtroom security personnel face different challenges that don't normally involve firearms. These officers also wear specially designed holsters, called security holsters, that require them to perform a certain procedure before their guns can be removed from the holster. Level II holsters are now available and are thought to be more secure than ever. A gun isn't easily removed from these holsters unless someone knows how to do so properly.Inadequate training and failure to follow proper security procedures could have been a possible factor in the March, 2005, courthouse shootings of Judge Rowland Barnes, his court clerk, and two sheriff's deputies in Atlanta, Georgia.The defendant, Brian Nichols, was a known violent offender who had been caught possessing two homemade shanks (shank is jail or prison slang for a knife) fashioned from metal hinges, just two days prior to the courtroom murders. officers should have taken every precaution available to maintain control of such a vicious offender.It's common procedure throughout the law enforcement community to use two officers when escorting or transporting known violent prisoners, especially those obviously intending to commit bodily harm. In the case of the Atlanta shootings, a single female deputy was assigned to supervise and escort this extremely dangerous prisoner. Nichols easily overpowered the officer, took her weapon, and went on his murderous rampage.The duties of a courtroom security officer are, at times, no less dangerous than that of a police officer. The sheriff I worked for many years ago was adamant about his assignment of sworn, trained police officers in the courts. He didn't believe in courtroom security training for nonpolice deputy sheriffs. He called the training inadequate and impractical. Most officers thought his decision inane and a waste of police manpower. The events that unfolded in that Atlanta courtroom might have proved my former boss quite correct.OPENING STATEMENTSWith the court in order and everyone in their places, the judge allows attorneys from both sides to begin their opening statements. These statements are basically their outlines or plans of action for their cases and their expectations of the trial's outcome. Opening statements are always made prior to the introduction of any evidence.A prosecutor makes his opening statements to a jury.The prosecution is allowed to speak first, followed by the attorney for the defense. If the trial is a jury trial, the attorneys speak directly to the jury; in a trial by judge, they address the judge with their statements.SWEARING IN WITNESSESThe bailiff or an assistant escorts witnesses from the witness room as the clerk of the court calls them to the stand. Each witness must be sworn in by the bailiff, the clerk, or the judge. To be properly sworn in, he must raise his right hand and promise that everything he tells the court is the truth, to the best of his knowledge. The swearing-in process is performed so that, if the witness is not truthful while testifying, he may be prosecuted for perjury. If he's not sworn to tell the truth, no perjury charges may be brought against him.Police officers are often called to testify in cases involving criminal matters. In each case, the police officer normally has met with the prosecutors well in advance of the trial, has rehearsed his individual testimony, and has knowledge of all questions that will be asked of him. Many times, a mock trial is set up to allow the officer to practice his testimony in front of the prosecution team. The team asks a set of suspected defense questions as well. The entire questioning process is very well rehearsed to prevent mistakes during the actual trial. This rehearsal partially explains the canned tone of voice and the monotonous responses we hear from police officers as they testify on televised criminal cases.PROSECUTOR's DIRECT EXAMINATIONAt the conclusion of the opening statements, the prosecutor begins to call forth each of her witnesses. The questioning of a witness who's been called on to testify by either the prosecution or defense is called direct examination. One at a time, each of the witnesses recounts his knowledge of the crime. The prosecutor also calls on police officers and expert witnesses to provide testimony.Police officers answer questions regarding their investigation of the crime. Experts are called upon to testify about their background (education and experience) and the results of any testing they may have performed on individual items of evidence, such as fingerprints and DNA. Medical examiners and coroners may also be called on to testify about their findings during autopsy.Defense's Cross-ExaminationUpon completion of the prosecutor's questioning, the defense is allowed to cross-examine each witness. Cross-examination of a witness occurs when the opposing attorney questions a witness, such as when a defense attorney questions a witness who testified on behalf of the prosecution. During cross-examination, attorneys sometimes attempt to find inconsistencies in a witness's statements by asking tricky or repetitive questions.RedirectWhen cross-examination is complete, the prosecution gets a second attempt to ask her witness additional questions. This second attempt at questioning is called redirect. During the second round of questioning, the prosecutor may try to clarify any questions that may have been brought about by the defense attorney's cross-examination.Motion to DismissAt the conclusion of the prosecution's witness testimony and evidence presentation, cross-examination by the defense, and redirect by the prosecution, the defense normally asks for a motion to dismiss all charges against his client. In nearly all cases, judges refuse to grant this request.Many judges find this point in the trial — the end of the prosecution's case and the beginning of the defense's case — to be an excellent time to take a break, and the judge may order a recess. If the recess comes at the end of the day, court is adjourned until the following day.Defendants who are unhappy with the services of their court-appointed attorneys may make a formal request for a change of counsel. Judges rarely grant a change unless the defendant can prove that the attorney has been negligent or ineffective in her duties as counsel, which is a rare occurrence. If the defendant is unhappy and can prove that his attorney provided subpar services, he may ask for a dismissal based upon ineffective assistance of counsel.DEFENSE's DIRECT EXAMINATIONAfter the prosecution has presented their entire case, it's the defense's turn to present theirs. They do so by questioning their own witnesses and presenting their own evidence.Prosecution's Cross-ExaminationJust as the defense had the opportunity to cross-examine the prosecution's witnesses, the prosecution now has the opportunity to question witnesses for the defense.RedirectAt the conclusion of the prosecution's cross-examination, the defense is allowed to re-question the defense witnesses. They do so to clarify any discrepancies and inconsistencies in their statements that may have been brought about by the prosecutor during her cross-examination. At the conclusion of redirect, the defense attorney must rest his case.RebuttalAfter the defense rests their case, the prosecutor has one last chance to disprove the case that's been presented by the defense. She does so by attempting to explain away, contradict, or clarify any inconsistent statements. She also may try to discredit evidence that's been presented by the defense. This final effort is called a rebuttal.DECIDING ON JURY INSTRUCTIONSAttorneys for both sides meet with the judge to determine which legal rules, called jury instructions, should be provided to the jury for making a decision regarding guilt or innocence. Some standard jury instructions can be found in books and publications that are used as a standard in courts all across the country.The following is a jury instruction excerpt from the California code. These instructions vary in other locations:202: DIRECT AND INDIRECT EVIDENCEEvidence can come in many forms. It can be testimony about what someone saw or heard or smelled. It can be an exhibit admitted into evidence. It can be someone's opinion.Some evidence proves a fact directly, such as testimony of a witness who saw a jet plane flying across the sky. Some evidence proves a fact indirectly, such as testimony of a witness who saw only the white trail that jet planes often leave. This indirect evidence is sometimes referred to as “circumstantial evidence.” In either instance, the witness's testimony is evidence that a jet plane flew across the sky.As far as the law is concerned, it makes no difference whether evidence is direct or indirect. You may choose to believe or disbelieve either kind. Whether it is direct or indirect, you should give every piece of evidence whatever weight you think it deserves.204: WILLFUL SUPPRESSION OF EVIDENCEYou may consider whether one party intentionally concealed or destroyed evidence. If you decide that a party did so, you may decide that the evidence would have been unfavorable to that party.CLOSING ARGUMENTSBoth the prosecution and the defense attorneys present closing arguments to the jury at the conclusion of the trial. Closing arguments afford each side an equal opportunity to summarize all evidence and testimony that's been presented to the jury throughout the course of the entire trial. This is also each attorney's last chance to attempt to sway the jury into his way of thinking.Depending upon the complexity of the case, and the amount of evidence presented during a criminal trial, the entire trial can last from any part of one day to several months. In the end, the entire matter is decided by a weighing of the facts. A criminal verdict must be decided only on the evidence that was presented.The prosecution's case must be proven beyond all reasonable doubt for the jury to return a verdict of guilty. If the slightest doubt exists in the minds of the jury, or judge, about the guilt of the defendant, the defendant must be found innocent.A civil case verdict is based upon a preponderance of evidence, meaning that more evidence than not must lean toward the plaintiff in order for them to prevail.INSTRUCTING THE JURYThe judge faces the jury and describes to them the importance of the decision they're about to make. The judge also explains that he's about to give them certain instructions as to how to make that decision. Once the judge is sure that the jury understands the process, he then reads each of the previously agreed-upon instructions to them.JURY DELIBERATIONSAfter receiving their instructions from the judge, the jury is escorted into a private jury room where they begin the process of determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.READING OF THE VERDICTWhen the jury's reached a verdict, the judge is notified and the bailiff escorts the jury back into the courtroom. The foreman of the jury hands the written verdict to the bailiff, who then presents it to the judge. After reading the verdict the judge orders the defendant to stand and then hands the verdict to the clerk of court to read aloud.If the jury finds the defendant guilty, the defense attorney normally makes what's known as a posttrial motion for an acquittal or a new trial. These requests are rarely ever granted.If the verdict is a not guilty verdict, paperwork is completed. The ex-defendant and the judge must sign forms regarding personal property and release of bond money to the proper persons. When this process is completed, the defendant is set free.SENTENCINGA guilty verdict normally results in the immediate custody of the defendant by corrections officials. The defendant is handcuffed and taken directly to jail to await the next hearing. Her next appearance in court will be for her actual sentencing.The probation department assigns an officer to the defendant who then begins a thorough background investigation and report. The completed report is called a presentence report. To gather the information for this report, the probation officer assigned to the case generally speaks with family members, friends, neighbors, employers, church members and preachers, doctors, teachers, and members of local law enforcement. A criminal history check and driver's license report are also run.INTERESTING LAWS THAT ARE STILL ON THE BOOKSIn Alabama, it's illegal for men to spit in front of women.In Rehoboth Beach, Delaware, it's illegal to whisper in church.In Florida, it's illegal for women to parachute on Sunday.In Florida, it's illegal to sing in public places while wearing a swimsuit.In Hawaii, it's illegal to place coins in one's ears.In Kentucky, it's illegal to throw eggs at a public speaker.In Baltimore, Maryland, it's illegal to throw a bale of hay from a second story window.In North Carolina, it's illegal to sing off-key.In Oklahoma, it's illegal to engage in whaling.In Oklahoma, it's illegal to have the hind legs of any animal in your boots.In California, it's illegal for any vehicle without a driver to travel over sixty miles per hour.In Washington, if two trains reach a crossing at the same time, it's illegal for one to go until the other has passed.The information is all compiled into the presentence report and sent to the sentencing judge for review and consideration. The report assists the judge with determining an appropriate sentence. The report is an in-depth look into the defendant's lifestyle and health. Mitigating factors such as mental illness, past criminal record, or outstanding community involvement can influence a judge's decision and may warrant an increased or decreased sentence.The length of sentence is based upon the defendant's past criminal history, the nature of her current crime, the violence associated with the crime, the defendant's repetitiveness of criminal activity, past probation violations, and past jail and prison records. Sentencing guidelines have been developed to assist the judge in his decision.The sentencing hearing is a brief affair. The defendant stands as the judge reads the sentence. When the judge is finished pronouncing the sentence, the defendant is no longer a defendant in a criminal trial. He's now an inmate remanded to the custody of the Department of Corrections, and sheriff's deputies will detain him until they personally deliver him to prison. At the prison, he is entered into a reception center or receiving center, where he's processed and begins serving his sentence.COURTROOM FAUX PASSometimes a prosecutor asks an undercover police officer to wear the same clothing and hairstyle to court as he wore at the time he arrested a particular defendant. This is done to allow the court to see, and the defendant to remember, exactly how things were at the time of the undercover operation. For example, an undercover officer who comes to court wearing a full-dress uniform may look like a different person than the one who bought drugs from the defendant. If the officer wears plain clothes in court, the defendant is more apt to recognize him and remember the exact drug deal.The intention is to leave as little room for doubt in a criminal trial as possible. It was a procedure that paid off for one officer.During an undercover operation a veteran narcotics agent arrested a young man for selling marijuana. At the time of the arrest, this officer was dressed in stereotypical attire — jeans and a T-shirt — but he had also donned a long-haired wig as part of his disguise. His real hair was buzz-cut in the normal state trooper style, which, in those days, was not cool among the young. Short hair simply spelled cop.The trooper wore the wig to court when testifying during the suspect's trial. The man remembered the trooper as someone he had sold drugs to, so he pled guilty and was given a suspended sentence. The judge also gave him a stern warning that a repeat violation would earn him some harsh time in the county jail. The young man, of course, said it would never happen again.Outside the courtroom, the trooper removed his wig and walked to his undercover police sports car where he tossed the hairpiece into the back seat. When he turned around, the suspect he had just finished testifying against was walking by. The officer jokingly asked him if he had any pot for sale.The newly convicted drug dealer instantly glanced nervously around the parking lot. Suddenly, the officer realized the man didn't recognize him without the wig, even though he still wore the same clothing. The dealer looked from side to side again and said, “Sure, but be careful, man. There are undercover cops everywhere around this place.” He pulled an ounce of marijuana from his pants pockets and offered it to the officer. He was, of course, promptly arrested, again. Incidentally, he'd had the pot in his pocket during his trial. This crook deserved the all-time dumb-criminal-of-the-year award. He also deserved the jail sentence that was imposed by a judge who wasn't very lenient the second time around.
