---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_026.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["hair", "glass", "fiber", "two", "paint", "evidence", "crime", "suspect", "scene", "sample", "chemical", "found", "analysis", "color", "examiner", "determine", "piece", "might", "source", "property", "match", "car", "victim", "often", "one"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit026html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 15 
TRACE EVIDENCE: 
SWEATING THE SMALL STUFF  
Locard’s Exchange Principle, introduced and discussed in Chapter Two, states that whenever any two objects contact each other, a transfer of materials occurs. In the early 1900s, Professor Edmond Locard showed that he could use traces of dust to determine whether a particular individual had been in a certain place. He reasoned that we all constantly pick up and leave behind tiny pieces of our environment, and indeed we do.
Locard’s Exchange Principle is the underlying reason each crime scene is secured and access to it controlled. Everyone who enters the scene adds and takes away trace materials; this contamination might render any evidence found useless at trial. Obviously, if the first officers on the scene do not yet know a crime has occurred, or if they must disarm and apprehend a suspect or assist a victim, some contamination will occur. The same is true for medical and rescue personnel who must help the injured. These situations make the criminalist’s job much more difficult.
Nowhere is Locard’s Exchange Principle more clearly demonstrated than in the location, collection, and analysis of trace evidence.
Modern criminals are clever, or at least they think they are. They know to wear masks and use the dark of night to avoid being identified by any witnesses. They’ve learned the importance of wearing gloves or wiping away fingerprints. They know not to leave behind blood and semen, which contain their individual DNA pattern. This has been termed “The CSI Effect.” Criminals see all the CSI-like TV shows, both fictional such as CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, and factual, such as the numerous shows on TruTV, Discovery Channel, and A&E. And they learn a great deal about criminal investigations and forensic techniques from these shows.
Yet, despite all this information, criminals continue to be tracked down, arrested, and convicted. Very often this is the direct result of tiny bits of evidence. Evidence the perpetrator doesn’t see and doesn’t realize he is leaving behind or carrying away on his shoes and clothing.
Transferability is an important characteristic of most trace evidence. It clings to clothing, hides in shoe seams, nestles into hair, and settles into nooks and crannies. And it is typically very durable, in that it survives for months or years.
As we saw in Chapter Two, the major value of trace evidence is that it creates an association or link between suspects, places, and objects. In many situations, trace evidence is the only evidence that connects the suspect to the crime scene. This evidence must be carefully documented, photographed, collected, and protected from contamination before it is presented to the crime lab for detailed analysis.
Trace evidence is predominantly class rather than individualizing evidence (see Chapter Two: Evidence, “Class vs. Individual Characteristics”). This means it can exclude a suspect but can rarely absolutely implicate him. For example, if a blonde hair is found at a crime scene and the suspect has black hair, he is eliminated as the source of the hair and the police must develop another suspect. But, if the suspect’s hair matches that found at the crime scene, he remains a suspect. The hair may be his or it may be from someone else with similar hair.
ANALYZING TRACE EVIDENCE  
The analysis of trace evidence requires a thorough investigation of its physical, optical, and chemical properties. Since most trace evidence is very small, it can’t often be adequately examined with the naked eye. Nor are its optical or chemical properties easily determined. Fortunately, the modern crime lab possesses a wide array of magnification systems, including the compound microscope, the comparison microscope, the stereomicroscope, and the scanning electron microscope (SEM), as well as a number of analytical devices and techniques such as the energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS), microspectrophotometry, X-ray diffraction, neutron activation analysis, and infrared spectrophotometry. Each of these will be mentioned in this chapter and discussed in detail in the appendix.
Initially, most types of trace evidence are inspected with the naked eye under good lighting conditions. Indirect or angled light can often bring out details by creating depth and shadows in everything from soil and plants to paint and glass. Ultraviolet and laser lights may expose certain fibers and hair. But the minute detail of the substance requires that the evidence be viewed through some type of magnification system.
These microscopic techniques are useful for determining the physical properties of hair, fibers, glass, and paint, and these alone may exclude certain evidence as having shared a common source with a bit of crime scene evidence. But if the two pieces of evidence (the unknown crime scene sample and the known or control sample) are similar physically, then an analysis of the evidence’s optical and chemical properties must be undertaken.
TYPES OF TRACE EVIDENCE  
The bulk of trace evidence investigation involves hair, fibers, glass, paint, soil, and plant materials. Each of these can be brought to or carried away from the crime scene by the perpetrator without his knowledge. And since these materials often possess distinguishing characteristics, they may help link the guilty party to the scene of the crime. Let’s look at each of these.
HAIR 
Hair, both human and animal, is frequently found at crime scenes. The ME attempts to determine if the hair is from the victim, the perpetrator, the family dog, or some unknown source. As with virtually all forms of trace evidence, hair is considered class evidence, since at the present time we can’t individualize hair to an exact source, unless a portion of the follicle is attached from which DNA can be extracted (see Chapter Ten: DNA).
Hair is small, easily shed, clings to clothing and other materials, and goes unnoticed by the perpetrator. It is hardy and survives for a long period of time, even many years after a body has undergone putrefaction. Many toxins, particularly heavy metals such as arsenic, can be found in hair (see Chapter Eleven: Toxicology).
Hair analysis predominately deals with its structure and chemical characteristics. Its value as evidence depends on how confidently the examiner can use these characteristics to match hairs from known (the suspect) and unknown (the crime scene) sources. It is essential to note that hair varies not only from person to person but also from one area of an individual’s body to another. A person’s head, pubic, and axillary (armpit) hair are often very different.
The forensic use of hair analysis is not new. In fact, it was one of the earliest forensic techniques—the first paper on its use was published in France in 1857. Microscopic examination of hair was widely used by the turn of the century, and in 1931 Professor John Glaister (1856–1932) published his landmark book on the subject, Study of Hairs and Wools Belonging to the Mammalian Group of Animals, Including a Special Study of Human Hair, Considered From the Medico-Legal Aspects. It is now a common forensic technique that has been used to solve many cases, including the famous Atlanta child murders case (see Chapter Two: Evidence).
To help you understand how the criminalist uses hair as evidence, let’s look into the nature of hair itself.
Figure 15-1: Hair shaft structure. The hair shaft consists of a central medulla, a pigment-containing cortex, and a scaly cuticle. 
Structure of Hair 
Hair is an appendage of the skin, as are fingernails, and it grows from a pocket of specialized cells called a follicle. The shaft of the hair possesses three parts (see Figure 15-1): The central core is the medulla, the surrounding portion is the cortex, and the thin outer coating is the cuticle. The examiner looks at each of these areas when he attempts to match two hairs.
MEDULLA: Though the medulla actually contains a collection of cells, it appears as if it is an empty or mud-filled central canal. The width of the medulla relative to the overall width of the hair is called the medullary index. In most animals, this index is greater than 0.5, which means that the medulla is more than half the thickness of the hair. In humans the medulla is typically narrow with an index of approximately 0.3, which means that the width of the medulla is only about one-third the width of the hair shaft. This fact is useful in distinguishing between human and animal hair.
Figure 15-2: Hair medullary patterns. Some hairs have no medulla, but those that do are continuous (A), interrupted (B), or fragmented (C). 
The material within the medulla may appear to be solid and continuous, interrupted, or fragmented (see Figure 15-2). The pattern varies greatly; this fact is extremely useful when comparing two hairs. If the medulla of two hairs (crime scene and suspect’s) are of the same width, share the same color, and possess the same pattern, then they could have shared a common origin, namely the suspect. If not, the suspect did not shed that particular hair at the scene.
Not all hairs have a medulla. Human head hairs possess either no medulla or one that is fragmented. The notable exception is that, in those with a Mongoloid racial background, the medulla is typically continuous.
In animals, the medulla material might appear fragmented or disjointed, or may contain cells arranged in various patterns. For example, the medulla of cat hair resembles a string of pearls. These characteristics help the criminalist determine the species of origin. He can refer to databases of hair types from various animals to help make the match.
CORTEX: In human hair, the cortex is the largest portion of the shaft and is the component that contains the hair pigment, which gives hair its color. The pigment particles show highly variable color, shape, and distribution patterns that help determine race and are important to matching and identification. The cortex may also contain tiny air pockets called cortical fusi and other structures such as ovoid bodies. Under microscopic examination, these various patterns are used to seek a match.
If two hairs share the same color and distribution pattern of pigment, fusi, and ovoid bodies, then the examiner can say that they likely shared a common origin.
CUTICLE: The cuticle, the layer of cells that cover the surface of the shaft, looks like the scales on a fish or like roofing tiles. These scales overlap and always point up the shaft and away from the bulb. They are of three basic types and tend to vary by species. Coronal (crown-like) scales give the hair a mosaic surface appearance and are rarely seen in humans, but are common among rodents. Spinous (petal-like) scales tend to be somewhat triangular in shape and are not found in humans but are typical of cats. Imbricate (flattened) scales are found in humans and many other animals. The examiner can use the scale pattern to determine if the hair is human and to match one hair to another.
Hair Analysis 
For the criminalist to make a comparison, he must have the unknown (crime scene) hair as well as known hair samples from the victim and any suspects. The known hair samples should be taken from various areas of the victim’s and the suspect’s body. Typically, fifty hairs are removed from various parts of the head, several pubic hairs are pulled, and in sexual assault cases, the pubic region is combed for foreign hairs and other trace materials.
The examiner then uses a comparison microscope (see the appendix) to view the two hairs side by side. He first compares their color and width. If these do not match, they did not come from the same source and further analysis is not necessary. If these characteristics do match, he then examines the medulla (if present) and determines if the two hairs share the same distribution pattern. Similarly, he compares the color and distribution pattern of pigment in the cortex. Lastly, he determines if the two share a common cuticle pattern.
By using infrared microspectrophotometry (see the appendix), the examiner might be able to determine if the hair has been dyed, bleached, or treated, and, if he has a complete strand, how long ago the last treatment was. Since hair grows approximately a half-inch a month, a one-inch segment of undyed or unbleached hair near the root would suggest that the last treatment was two months earlier. This may be another point of comparison.
Similarity among all these characteristics is essential for a match. But, as I mentioned earlier, even a match is not absolute proof that a particular individual shed the hair in question. Yet, it is still important evidence. A study performed by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police showed that if a crime scene head hair matches a suspect’s head hair in all the above respects, the odds that the crime scene hair came from someone other than the suspect is 4,500 to 1. With pubic hairs, the probability falls to about 800 to 1.
Race, Sex, and Age 
It would be helpful if the criminalist could accurately determine the race, sex, and age of the person who shed a particular crime scene hair, as this would significantly narrow the suspect pool. In some cases this is possible, but these determinations are neither easy nor absolute.
The general nature of the hair (color, thickness, curliness) can sometimes separate the source along broad racial lines. Caucasoids tend to have straight or wavy hair with a round or oval cross-sectional shape and a finer, more evenly distributed cortical pigment pattern. Those of Negroid ancestry have curly hair that is flat to oval when viewed in cross section and the cortical pigment is denser and unevenly distributed. Unfortunately, these characteristics are not completely reliable.
Neither age nor sex can be determined with any degree of accuracy. Certain dyes may be more likely used by women than men, but this is not consistent. Infants tend to have short, fine hair, but this too is not predictable.
Site of Origin 
One of the first questions the examiner must answer is where on the body the unknown hair likely came from. Is it a head hair, a pubic hair, or one from some other location? Since he wants to match the crime scene hair with hair taken from the same location of any suspect, this determination is essential. Though not always true, in general, hair taken from different body areas tend to have different cross-sectional geometry. Head, eyebrow, and eyelash hairs are more likely round while axillary hairs are oval. Beard hairs tend to be triangular.
Manner of Removal 
Was the hair in question yanked out or cut? Such a determination may indicate what happened between the perpetrator and the victim and may help with reconstruction of the crime scene. Microscopic examination of the hair root may reveal tissue adhering to the root. Since yanking hair from the scalp often rips out follicular tissues as well, this finding suggests that the hair was forcibly removed rather than fell out naturally. A cut edge indicates that some sharp instrument was employed to cut the hair. In such situations, it is often possible to determine what instrument did the cutting.
Individual Chemical Characteristics 
Many of the chemicals within the human body can also be found in hair. By using techniques such as neutron activation analysis (NAA), which can detect over a dozen different chemicals, the chemical content of hair can be determined.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: JOHN VOLLMAN 
In 1958, the body of sixteen-year-old Gaetane Bouchard of Edmundston, Canada, turned up in a gravel pit near her home. She had been stabbed several times in the chest. Near the pit, police found tire tracks and two chips of green paint that appeared as if they had been chipped from an automobile by flying gravel as the car drove away. Witnesses said they had seen Gaetane earlier in a light green car with a man. Friends told police that Gaetane had been seeing John Vollman, a twenty-year-old musician from across the border in Madawaska, Maine.
Indeed, Vollman owned a light-green 1952 Pontiac. An examination of the car showed that the paint was chipped and one of the chips found at the scene seemed to match one of the defects. This was confirmed by microscopic analysis. At autopsy, a single hair was found clutched in the victim’s hand. This hair along with hair from Vollman were subjected to what was at that time the new technique of neutron activation analysis and they were found to be very similar in chemical content. Based on these findings, Vollman changed his plea from not guilty to guilty of manslaughter. This was the first murder case in which “atomic evidence,” as it was called in 1958, led to a conviction.
Since it is rare for two people to have the exact same chemicals in their hair, comparing the types and amounts of these substances might allow the forensic examiner to determine if two hairs likely came from the same person.
Hair and DNA 
I said earlier that hair was predominantly class evidence, but there are circumstances where it can supply DNA, which is highly individualizing (see Chapter Ten: DNA, “Mitochondrial DNA”). Hair production and growth occur when follicular cells die, lose their nuclei (and DNA), and are incorporated into the hair shaft. This means that the hair shaft is composed of cellular debris and possesses no nuclear DNA. The follicle (bulb) is composed of living cells, which do possess DNA. If during their struggle hair is pulled from either the victim or the assailant, the follicular tissue often remains attached and can serve as a source of DNA, which can be used for DNA fingerprinting and matching.
Occasionally, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) can be extracted from the hair shaft. Since the hair is built from cellular remnants, and since the cell cytoplasm houses mtDNA, it is possible to obtain a usable sample of mtDNA from the shaft of the hair. Here, even cut or follicle-less shed hair can be useful in identifying the source of the hair.
For example, if the mtDNA of a hair found at a crime scene matches that from hair taken from the suspect’s siblings or other maternal-line relative (mother, grandmother, etc.), it proves that the person shedding the hair at the scene shared a maternal lineage with the suspect’s relatives. This means that either he was there or one of his relatives was. Since Granny didn’t likely commit the crime, he must have. This evidence is not as strong as a nuclear DNA match, but it is very powerful.
FIBERS 
Fibers are everywhere. Clothing, carpet, car mats, bedding, towels, and a thousand other things people use every day are made from various fabrics, which of course are composed of fibers. Because fibers are so common and come in such a wide variety of types, they are important types of trace evidence. Like hair, they are easily shed, transferred, and transported, and are almost never noticed by the criminal. They can be found on the victim’s or suspect’s body, hair, or clothing, as well as at the scene of the crime. After they are collected, the crime lab attempts to identify the manufacturer or the source of a particular fiber, or to match one fiber to another.
Time is critical in collecting fiber evidence. Studies have shown that fibers clinging to the clothing of a victim or a suspect are lost quickly. By four hours, 80 percent have fallen away and by twenty-four hours, 95 percent are lost. For this reason, a search for trace evidence on the clothing of the victim and of any suspects is done as soon as possible. Fibers are lifted from clothing, furniture, or other surfaces with tape or by vacuuming.
Fibers Classifications 
Fibers are classified into three basic types: natural, manufactured, or synthetic.
NATURAL FIBERS come from various animals, plants, and minerals. These are often easily identified and compared by microscopic inspection alone. It might seem odd that animal hair would be considered a fiber, but when it is woven or used to manufacture clothing and other household items, it is considered to be a fiber rather than a shed animal hair. Examples are wool, mohair, cashmere, and silk. Plant fibers include cotton, hemp, flax, and jute. By far, the most commonly used natural fiber is cotton. When examined under a microscope it has an easily recognizable “twisted ribbon” pattern. Undyed white cotton is so common that it is of little evidentiary value. Natural fibers, such as asbestos, can also be derived from minerals.
MANUFACTURED FIBERS are also called REGENERATED FIBERS. To make them, raw cotton or wood pulp is dissolved and cellulose is extracted. The cellulose is then “regenerated” into fibers. Rayon, acetate, and triacetate are common examples.
SYNTHETIC FIBERS come from POLYMERS, which are substances made up of a series of single molecules (monomers) strung together to make long molecules that can be thousands of monomers in length. The molecule looks like a long chain, each link representing a monomer. The properties of the polymer depend on the chemical structure of the repeating monomer.
Polymer fibers are made by melting a polymeric material and then extruding it through the very fine holes of a spinnerette. The material passes through the spinnerette as a thin fiber that quickly hardens and can then be woven into fabrics. Nylon and polyester are synthetic fibers.
Fiber Identification and Comparison 
The fiber analyst is often asked to determine the likely source of a fiber. Is it a carpet fiber, and if so, who manufactured it? Or he may be presented with several fibers and asked to assess whether they came from a common source. Does the fiber on the victim’s clothing match fibers taken from the floor mats of the suspect’s car? In order to make these determinations, he evaluates the fiber’s physical, optical, and chemical properties.
In the lab, he first examines the unknown fiber under a stereomicroscope in order to assess its diameter, shape, color, shine, curls, and crimps, and to look for any attached debris. When matching two fibers, he uses a comparison microscope so that he can compare the two fibers side by side.
Microspectrophotometry is used to determine the fibers true color without the problem of observer variance (see the appendix). In fiber analysis, visible light microspectrophotometry is favored over its infrared light counterpart. This device analyzes the exact wavelength of the light and can determine if the colors of two fibers are indeed identical or merely appear so.
When the film is exposed to polarized light, the reflective index of the fiber can be estimated; this, in turn, can help determine its makeup. The reflective index is a measure of how the fiber reflects light of various types. Different materials reflect visible, ultraviolet, and infrared light in varied and characteristic ways. Comparing the reflective index of two fibers can help determine if they are similar.
The examiner then views the cross section of the fiber to determine if it is single-stranded or multi-stranded—or if it is tri-lobed, that is, if it appears as if three strands were melted together into one.
If the fiber or piece of fabric has been damaged, a scanning electron microscope can be used to examine fine structural and surface details. These might reveal exactly how the damage occurred. Was it torn, cut, or rent by a bullet?
Another useful characteristic of many fibers is known as its refractive index (RI). When light passes from one medium to another, it is refracted (bent). A stick dipped into a swimming pool or a bowl of water appears to be bent even though it is actually straight. The cause of this phenomenon is that light moves at different speeds in different mediums—faster through air and slower through water. This causes the light to bend so that the stick appears that it, too, is bent. The degree of this bending is called the refractive index. Fibers possess different RIs, and this difference can be used for identity and comparison.
A similar property is called birefringence, or double refraction. When light is passed through some synthetic fibers, it is refracted twice and emerges as two different waves of polarized light, each with its own refractive characteristics. A comparison of the birefringence of two fibers is useful for identification and comparison.
If the compared fibers vary in any of the above characteristics, they do not match and could not have come from the same material. If they are similar in all these physical and optical properties, the examiner might then move forward with testing the fiber’s chemical makeup.
Two commonly used procedures for the chemical analysis of fibers are the combination of a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (SEM/EDS) and the combination of gas chromatography with mass spectrometry (GC/MS) (see the appendix). Each of these reveals the chemical composition of the fiber and of any pigments or treatments that may have been added to it during the manufacturing process or as a later alteration. In fact, GC/MS can separate and identify each chemical found in the fiber or any applied treatments. For example, the presence of tin and bromide might indicate treatment with a fire retardant, while titanium oxide reveals the presence of a delustering product (lessens the fiber’s luster or shine).
These chemical determinations can often indicate the manufacturer of the fiber or may serve to more strongly match one fiber to another. After the criminalist analyzes the physical and chemical properties of any known and unknown fibers, he might be able to say that the two very likely came from the same source. Or, if the fibers differ in any of their characteristics, he would conclude that they did not share a common source.
GLASS 
As with other types of trace evidence, glass analysis rarely gives individualizing evidence; it gives class evidence, which makes it more useful to exclude than to include a given suspect. The best the examiner can hope for is to be able to state that two pieces of glass are similar and could have come from a common source. The operative word here is “could.” Maybe they did, maybe they didn’t.
For example, after comparing two pieces of glass, if the examiner finds that they are dissimilar in physical, optical, or chemical properties, he can confidently say that they did not come from the same source. Alternatively, if they share the same class characteristics (color, shape, surface characteristics, and optical and chemical properties), he can say that they could have shared a common source, but can’t state that as fact. Thus, the evidence can be exclusionary, but not necessarily proof positive. The notable exception is the matching of lines of fracture.
Glass products are all over—windows, cups, plates, car headlamps, everywhere you look. Glass comes in many sizes, shapes, types, and colors, and varies greatly in its chemical composition. It breaks easily and typically scatters fragments when it does. These tiny slivers and chips can attach to weapons, shoes, and clothing, and settle on the perpetrator’s skin and in his hair. The perpetrator who shatters a window, breaks a vase, or drops a glass object risks transferring these fragments to his clothing.
Characteristics of Glass 
Glass is produced by heating a mixture of sand (silica or silicon dioxide), limestone (calcium carbonate), and soda (sodium carbonate). During the process certain other chemicals are added to alter the characteristics of the glass. Various impurities also creep into the final product. The analysis of the chemical makeup of these additives and impurities is useful in matching or excluding an unknown sample.
Glass has a hard, smooth surface, and is an ideal substrate for fingerprints and shoeprints. For example, if an intruder smashes a window to enter a home, he might accidentally touch a piece of glass while crawling through the opening, or perhaps step on a large piece of a broken glass that has fallen to the floor. In either case, he could unknowingly transfer clear and usable fingerprints or shoeprints.
Broken glass can also injure the perpetrator, causing bleeding. If the point of entry or exit is a broken window or a sliding door panel, the perpetrator can easily suffer a scrape or cut and be completely unaware of the injury, and that he is leaving behind blood or tissue—and thus DNA.
Glass Analysis 
Glass analysis includes two basic evaluations: identification and comparison. The glass examiner will use the physical and chemical properties of the glass to make these determinations.
IDENTIFICATION: Identifying an unknown sample of glass is often crucial to solving a crime. The examiner is often given a piece of glass and asked to identify its source: a broken drinking glass, windowpane, or car headlamp. If he is able to make that determination, he then attempts to identify the likely manufacturer.
Since different glass manufacturers use different manufacturing components, processes, and techniques, analyzing the physical, optical, and chemical properties of glass often indicates who made it and when. For example, a shard of glass from a car windshield or headlamp might reveal the make, model, and year of a car used in a crime or involved in an accident or hit-and-run.
COMPARISON: The examiner is also frequently asked to compare two separate pieces of glass and determine if they share a common origin. Did the chip of glass found on the suspect’s clothing come from the shattered window at the crime scene?
Physical Properties 
The first step in glass analysis is to look at the color, thickness, shape, pattern, and opacity of the sample submitted. Often these characteristics alone provide a clue to the source or show that two pieces could or could not have come from the same piece of glass. A shard from a window, a shattered crystal bourbon glass, an eyeglass lens, and an automobile windshield would each appear very different.
Unfortunately, this isn’t always enough. Let’s say the examiner is comparing pieces of a broken drinking glass found at the crime scene (known) with a piece found in a suspect’s pant cuff (unknown). The two samples might have the same color, shape, and thickness, but that doesn’t necessarily mean they were once part of the same glass. The examiner’s next step is to determine if the two pieces of glass possess the same density. Density is a measure of weight to size. A one-inch square of dense glass weighs more than an identical-sized piece from less dense glass.
Comparing densities requires a cylindrical container filled with liquids of different densities. The liquids most often used are bromoform and bromobenzene. They are mixed together, the piece of glass is added, and then one or the other of the liquids is added until the glass is suspended, neither rising nor sinking. At this point, the glass and the liquid mixture possess the same density. Since the densities of the liquids are known, the density of the mixture, and thus of the glass, can be easily calculated.
If the known piece of glass has been suspended in this way, the unknown piece can be added. If it too remains suspended, the densities of the two are identical. If the unknown fragment either sinks or floats, the two pieces of glass do not share the same density and thus could not have come from the same source.
But, even if the two samples share the same physical characteristics and density, they still could have come from different sources. To help solve this, the examiner would then turn to the sample’s optical properties.
Optical Properties 
Various glass products transmit, reflect, and refract light in different ways. Transmitted light passes through the glass, reflected light bounces off it, and refracted light passes through but its path is refracted (bent), as in a prism. Different types of glass differ in one or more of these optical properties. If the two samples of glass share each of these optical properties, then they could have come from the same source. If not, then they did not.
The RI is tested by submerging the piece of glass in a liquid, such as silicon oil, that changes its RI according to its temperature. The oil is then slowly heated. At the point where the piece of glass seems to disappear, the RIs of the glass and the oil are equal. Since the RI of the silicon oil at any given temperature is known, measuring the temperature yields the RI of the glass.
One problem with matching two pieces of colored glass is that each person sees or perceives color differently. To get around these individual variations, the process of optical examination is automated and employs special optical and computer equipment that can evaluate the true color, transparency, and reflectivity of a glass object. These methods remove observer variation from the process.
If the two samples match in all the above characteristics, the examiner would next look at the chemical nature of the glass in question.
Chemical Properties 
During the manufacturing process, various substances are added to glass to change its color, transparency, texture, and strength, as well as its reflective and refractive properties. Cookware and glassware need to be relatively heat-and shock-resistant. This is achieved with the addition of boron. Less sturdy glass is found in windows, which often have a high sodium and calcium content due to the addition of inexpensive soda lime. Colored glass often contains lead and other pigments. Lead is added to make crystal sparkle, while magnesium oxide adds strength to plate glass and aluminum oxide does so to bottle glass.
The forensic chemist tests for these additives and any impurities in the glass with an eye toward matching the chemical makeup of any known and unknown samples.
It bears reiteration that if at any step in the testing process the two samples differ in any of their physical, optical, or chemical properties, the examiner can state with confidence that they did not come from the same source and further testing is unnecessary. If they are identical in every respect, then that is strong evidence that they shared a common source, but it is not absolutely conclusive.
Glass Fractures 
Though none of the above properties can absolutely prove that two pieces of glass were once one, the fracture pattern might. If the known and the unknown samples are physically and chemically identical and also fit together in a jigsaw fashion, this is extremely strong evidence that they were at one time joined into a single unit. For example, let’s say that a piece of car headlamp is found attached to the clothing of a hit-and-run victim. If a suspect car with a broken headlamp is found and the glass bit exactly fits into the gap, the examiner would feel confident that the piece came from that exact headlamp. The operating principle here is that no two things fracture exactly the same way.
Figure 15-3: Conchoidal fracture lines. Conchoidal fracture lines tend to curve out and away from the point of impact. Hackle marks also reveal the direction from which the force was applied. 
To determine if two pieces of glass were once part of the same object, the examiner often employs a microscope. If the fracture line of a piece of glass found at the scene is compared to a similar piece found in the possession of a suspect, and if the two edges are a perfect fit, the two pieces were once one.
The lab might also be asked to determine how and why a glass object, such as window, fractured. The pattern of the breaks and cracks seen in a window give the examiner a clue as to the speed and direction of the impact; this helps him determine what object likely caused the break. Was the object moving at a low velocity, such as a rock or fist, or at a higher rate, such as a bullet or explosive shrapnel?
Cracks in windows and other flat plates of glass tend to be radial and concentric. Radial cracks spread outward from the point of impact in a spoke-like configuration. Concentric cracks are a series of progressively larger circles around the point of impact. Overall, the cracked window might look like a spider web.
Certain characteristics of a break allow the examiner to determine the direction from which the impact came. This can be critically important in crime scene reconstruction. Did the bullet penetrate the window from outside in, or was it fired from within the house? Did a perpetrator break the window and enter, or did someone within the house break the window in an attempt to stage the scene and make a domestic homicide look like a breaking-and-entering murder?
Stress-fracture lines known as conchoidal lines, which radiate away from the impact site (see Figure 15-3), can help make this determination. Viewed through the thickness of the glass, these lines tend to curve out and away from the point of impact. Looking more closely at these conchoidal fractures, smaller lines that radiate in a perpendicular direction from edges that face away from the impact site may be seen. These are called hackle marks.
If a projectile such as a bullet strikes a window and penetrates it, but does not completely shatter it, it may leave a hole with or without surrounding fracture lines. On the side of approach, the bullet creates a rather clean hole, while on the opposite side, a small cone-shaped plug of glass is forced out. Simple visual inspection of the impact site reveals the projectile’s direction of travel.
If multiple bullets or other projectiles fracture the glass, it is often possible to determine the order in which they struck. Typically, the radial fractures caused by the second object do not cross those of the first. That is, they end when they encounter glass that is already fractured (see Figure 15-4).
Figure 15-4: Intersecting fracture lines. Impact radial fracture lines end abruptly at those produced by a previous impact. In this case, fracture B followed fracture A. 
These findings can be extremely important in corroborating or refuting suspect and witness statements and in reconstructing the events surrounding the crime. They can also be useful in assigning culpability.
Let’s say two gang members decide to do a drive-by shooting of a rival gang member while he is sitting in his car. The driver fires through the victim’s car window and begins to drive away. His accomplice then takes the gun and fires again. Both bullets pass through the window and strike the victim, one in the shoulder and the other in the head, killing him. Since both bullets came from the same gun and both men have gunshot residue on their hands (see Chapter Sixteen: Firearms Examination, “Gunshot Residues”), which of the shooters was the actual killer? Was it the first bullet (the driver) or the second (the passenger)? The dilemma is resolved when analysis of the fracture lines in the victim’s car window reveal that the second bullet was the killing shot.
PAINT 
Like glass, paint is everywhere. Walls, cars, and many types of objects are covered with paint. It is common for paint chips and smears to be transferred from one painted surface to another or to a victim or perpetrator during the commission of a crime.
For most crime labs, automobile paint constitutes the most common samples submitted for evaluation. As with other trace evidence, the examiner might be asked to determine the origin and manufacturer of the paint or to compare two samples to determine if they likely share a common origin. Often an analysis of the paint’s physical and chemical properties will determine the paint manufacturer and ultimately the make, model, and perhaps the year of the automobile involved in the accident. This is critical in hit-and-run investigations.
Occasionally, paint or paint chips from a house or other property are brought to the examiner. A perpetrator might walk across a freshly painted floor or brush against a freshly painted wall. He might then transfer this to his car, home, or belongings. Or he might get paint on the tools he used to break into a home or office.
An analysis of these transfers can be critical to placing a suspect at the crime scene.
To determine if two paint samples came from the same source, the examiner must answer three questions:
• Do the samples share identical physical and chemical properties?
• If multilayered, do the layers appear in the same sequence and thickness?
• If a chip, does its fracture edge match that of the area of paint loss? 
Paint Analysis 
Paint is a complex liquid whose four basic parts are binders, pigments, extenders, and modifiers. Binders are typically natural or synthetic resins to which the pigments are added. Pigments add color and may be organic (most blues and greens) or inorganic (most reds, yellows, and whites) in nature. Common chemical pigments include titanium oxide, which is white, and iron oxide, which is a component of many red pigments. Pigments tend to be expensive and manufacturers will use as little as possible to achieve the desired hue and concentration of color. Extenders add solid bulk, which increases the covering capacity of the paint. Modifiers change the gloss, flexibility, hardness, and durability of the paint. An example is lead oxide, which toughens paint and makes it resistant to weather. The type and proportion of each of these varies greatly from paint to paint and are the basis for analyzing paint in the crime lab.
The painting of an automobile is a multistep process that results in laying down several layers of paint products. Though the composition of each layer varies from manufacturer to manufacturer, the types of coatings used are similar. Common layers are:
ELECTROPLATED PRIMER: An epoxy resin electroplated to the car’s metal to provide corrosion and rust protection.
PRIMERS: Placed over the electroplated primer to smooth out imperfections and provide a base for the color coat.
BASECOAT: Also called the color coat; the layer that gives the car its color.
CLEAR COAT: Several coats of clear acrylic or polyurethane, which add shine, depth, and protection for the color coat.
An analysis of each of these coats, together or individually, can lead to the manufacturer, make, model, and production year of the vehicle. Each can also serve as a point of comparison between two paint samples.
Occasionally, the analyst is asked to determine the manufacturer of a particular paint sample. Often color alone can make this distinction, particularly with automotive paints, since some colors are unique to a particular automaker. To aid the examiner, there are several comprehensive databases of home and automobile paint. But since paints with similar colors are often quite different chemically, the examiner employs chemical analyses to make or exclude a match.
The lab might also be asked to determine if a known sample and an unknown sample came from the same source. Once again the physical and chemical properties of the paint come into play.
The initial analysis looks into the paint’s physical properties such as color and luster. As we saw with fibers, microspectrophotometry can be applied to paint to determine its true color without the problems of observer bias. In this case, the use of infrared microspectrophotometry is favored over the one employing visible light (see the appendix).
Next, layers or coats are examined for the thickness and sequence of colors if several have been used. The sequence of colors on a car that has been repeatedly repainted can be highly suggestive evidence if the crime scene sample and the suspect car display identical order and thickness in each layer.
Let’s say a paint chip is recovered from the clothing of a hit-and-run victim and this chip shows that the car had been repainted several times. Maybe the original color was red, but the vehicle was repainted in order black, a different shade of red, and finally yellow. If a suspect vehicle is located and a sample is taken for comparison and this sample shows the exact same colors in the exact same sequence and thickness of layers, the odds are unlikely that another vehicle could have been serially repainted in this fashion. And what if the chemical analysis of each layer of the crime scene sample matches those of the suspect vehicle? Time to book him.
The chemical examination of paint includes an analysis of any binders, pigments, extenders, and modifiers. To do this, the examiner will use the combination GC/MS (see the appendix) with a slight twist. Since the paint chip is a solid, the process used is called pyrolysis gas chromatography (Py/GC). Pyrolysis is the conversion of a solid into a gas by using high heat. In Py/GC, the chip is vaporized and the resulting gas passes through the GC column and is separated into its various chemical components. It then undergoes mass spectrometry, which reveals the “chemical fingerprint” of the components of the paint and allows for an accurate comparison of the submitted paint samples.
In addition, the use of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS), a combination termed SEM/EDS (see the appendix), offers a much higher resolution for separating the layers of the paint as well as the ability to perform an elemental analysis of each layer. Alternatively, infrared spectrophotometry (often used in conjunction with GC) has the ability to analyze the chemical nature of the paint as does X-ray diffraction (XRD) and analytic electron microscopy (AEM). These latter two techniques can accurately identify the various polymeric forms of paint additives. For example, some paints contain titanium oxide, which comes in three polymorphic forms. These diffraction techniques can distinguish these forms, and this might serve as the basis for comparing two otherwise very similar paints from one another. Each of these techniques is discussed in the appendix.
Finding that a known and an unknown sample are chemically identical can strongly suggest, though not absolutely prove, that the two samples came from the same source.
But, by far, the most individualizing evidence in paint analysis is physical match of the edges of a paint chip. Just as we saw with glass analysis, if the edges of a known and unknown paint chip can be shown to perfectly fit in exact jigsaw fashion, this is fairly conclusive evidence that the two are from the same source. Stereomicroscopic, comparative microscopic, and scanning electron microscopic examinations of the chips can aid in this matching process (see the appendix).
SOILS AND PLANTS 
Soil and plant materials are also trace evidence, since they are typically left behind or carried away from crime scenes in small quantities. Either can provide evidence that links a suspect to the scene of the crime. The lab is often asked to analyze soil taken from crime scenes, or from a suspect’s shoes, clothing, or car tires or from tools such as shovels.
Soil is not simply dirt. It is a complex mixture of minerals, plant and animal matter, and tiny particles of man-made products including glass, paint, asphalt, concrete, and other materials. It varies greatly from region to region and from locale to locale in a given area. For example, the soil in the Kansas heartland is much different from the red clay of Alabama. And the soil in a California beachfront community will differ greatly from soil in a downtown Los Angeles park.
If a known sample of soil is compared with unknown sample obtained from a suspect’s car or shoes and the two match physically and chemically, the examiner can say that the two samples likely came from the same place. This can place the suspect at the scene of the crime or can at least cast doubt on his story of where he picked up the innocuous-appearing dirt on his shoes.
Soil analysis begins with a visual and microscopic inspection and progresses to determination of color, consistency, pH (a measure of soil acidity), and mineral content. Any foreign substances, such as plant material or animal hair are also searched for. Let’s say a suspect says he has never been near a beach community where a crime has occurred, yet patches of sandy soil from the area are found on his car tires and floor mats. This could cast doubt on his story. Similarly, if a corpse has been found at a nearby stable, the finding of horse hair and flecks of horse manure in a dirt sample taken from a suspect’s boots might indicate that the soil came from a horse farm and not from the suspect’s backyard as he said.
If the known and unknown samples are similar physically, chemical analyses are then done to determine if two samples are chemically similar. GC/MS can be used to identify many constitutes of the sample and X-ray diffraction is useful for examining and comparing any minerals present in the soil.
Another technique known as differential thermal analysis (DTA) is also useful. The principle behind this analysis is that soils absorb and release heat at differing rates. In this test, a sample is placed into a specially designed furnace and heated. The point at which it breaks down, melts, or boils is determined. This point can be compared with other soils and their thermal properties can be said to match or not.
Plant materials have great forensic significance. They may be included in a soil sample or may be found on corpses, clothing, flooring, car mats, tools, and any number of places. Leaves, stems, pine needles, bark, flower petals, seeds, and pollen might be submitted for analysis.
Since various plants are native to different areas, the identification of any plant products can help determine the place of origin of the soil sample. For example, if pine needles are found on the floor near a homicide victim, and there are no pine trees near the residence, it is likely that the killer brought them with him on his clothing or shoes. A determination of the particular species of pine tree might narrow the area of search for the suspect.
Pollen, which comes from flowering plants, can be extremely useful to the forensics examiner. Pollen grains are tiny and rarely noticed, yet they are highly distinctive for their plant of origin. They may be found on clothing, in a victim’s or suspect’s hair, and even in envelopes that contain threatening letters or ransom notes. Microscopic identification of pollen found on a suspect might reveal that he had been in an area where the particular plant was in bloom, and this might serve to link him to a nearby crime scene. There are several pollen reference databases that help with species identification.
Finally, DNA might play a role (see Chapter Ten: DNA). Let’s say a corpse is found along a roadside and, on examination, bits of pine needles and a fine dust of pine pollen are found in the victim’s hair. Let’s further say that the nearest pine trees are a mile away, where a vagrant is found sleeping beneath one of them. Pine needles on his clothing, his sleeping bag, and the nearby ground are similar to those found on the victim. Yet, the vagrant denies that he has ever seen the victim. DNA from the needles and pine pollen obtained from the victim could be compared with the DNA from the needles and pollen found on the vagrant. A match would indicate that the materials found on the victim didn’t come from just any pine tree, but from the specific tree under which the vagrant was found.
DUST 
Dust is different from soil. It is any finely powdered substance, including coal dust, flour, cement or stone dust, tiny paper fibers, and many other products. If these are located at a crime scene or on a murder victim, the investigators have a great deal of useful information. The type of dust material might suggest that the killer had a specific occupation or a particular hobby. If similar dust can be located at a suspect’s residence, car, or place of work, it provides a connection between him and the crime. Perhaps not enough to win a conviction, or even to file charges, but it may help direct further investigation and focus the police more closely on the suspect.
Let’s say traces of cement and brick dust are found on the carpet near a slain elderly woman. Further, her son, who stands to inherit a good chunk of money from her estate, works at a construction site not far from the crime scene and works with a mason who is laying brick and mixing cement. If investigators can analyze and compare the dust from the crime scene with products obtained at the work site and show that they are physically and chemically identical, the son will need a good lawyer. 
