---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_019.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["blood", "type", "antigen", "test", "cell", "b", "sample", "reaction", "antibody", "found", "two", "red", "human", "semen", "one", "fluid", "stain", "testing", "used", "since", "gene", "would", "suspect", "serum", "may"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit019html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 9 
SEROLOGY: 
BLOOD AND OTHER BODY FLUIDS  
Serology is the science that deals with the examination, characterization, and analysis of blood and other body fluids, such as semen, saliva, and tears. It overlaps with other scientific disciplines, including biology, biochemistry, medical science, and cellular anatomy and physiology and is a critical component of forensic scientific investigation. Serology is a large and complex field, but I will try to keep it simple and address only those issues that relate to the field of forensics.
Blood is by far the most common biological fluid left at a crime scene because many crimes, from assaults to homicides, include the spilling of blood. It is also the most useful fluid since it offers many avenues of investigation to the forensics team. Some of these avenues depend on blood’s physical properties (how it behaves as a liquid), while others depend on its chemical and biological behaviors.
The physical properties of blood will be dealt with when we look at bloodstain patterns in chapter thirteen. The goal of the forensic bloodstain analyst is to reconstruct the crime scene, determine the sequence of events surrounding the crime, and follow the actions of the perpetrator, the victim, and the witnesses. This analysis can in turn link a suspect to a crime scene and support or refute suspect and witness statements.
After this evaluation of the bloodstains is completed, the serologist steps in to conduct chemical and biological tests of any blood samples retrieved from the scene. A serologist is a scientist who analyzes blood and body fluids. He attempts to characterize each bloodstain with an eye toward individualizing each stain. That is, he tries to determine whose blood it is and hopes to tightly link the suspect to the scene. Was the suspect far away at the time the crime occurred, as he states, or is the stain on his sock the victim’s blood? Is the blood beneath the victim’s fingernails that of the suspect or did it come from someone else? The coroner uses the science of serology to determine the truth.
I should point out that since the advent of DNA testing, the serological evaluation of blood and other body fluids has diminished as a forensics tool. The reason, as you will see in this and the following chapter, is that DNA testing offers much greater individualization. Yet, serology remains a useful tool for the forensic scientist. 
To begin our understanding of this subject, let’s first see what blood is.
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF BLOOD  
Blood is a complex substance. The liquid portion of whole blood is called plasma. It contains proteins, enzymes, clotting factors, and electrolytes, as well as cells of three basic types: leukocytes, or white blood cells (WBCs), erythrocytes, or red blood cells (RBCs), and platelets (tiny cells involved in blood clotting). If whole blood is allowed to clot and the clot is removed, the yellowish liquid remaining is called serum. It contains most of the proteins and enzymes of plasma, but none of the cells or clotting factors, which have been consumed in forming the blood clot.
For years, physicians attempted to perform blood transfusions from one person to another. Each attempt failed. The blood would clot within the recipient’s veins and cause almost immediate death. In 1901, Karl Landsteiner revealed one of the most important medical discoveries in history. He had earlier observed that all blood was not the same in that blood from different people reacted in varying ways when combined with blood from another. Sometimes there would be a reaction, and other times there would be none. To explain these observations, he embarked on a course of extensive experimentation and ultimately discovered that human blood could be classified into four types, which he designated A, B, AB, and O. For this reason, Landsteiner called his classification scheme the ABO blood group system.
He learned that if a person received blood from a donor with the same type of blood, he was much less likely to have a reaction. But if he received blood from a donor of a different type, the reaction was essentially universal.
In the decades following Landsteiner’s pivotal discovery, we have gained a much better understanding of the ABO system, which is still in use today. It not only serves as the basis for all blood transfusions, but also for matching blood samples in the forensic lab.
THE ABO SYSTEM  
The two most important components of blood from a forensics point of view are the red blood cells and the serum. Using these two components, we can determine the ABO type of a blood sample and most bloodstains.
The red blood cells are the cells that contain hemoglobin, which is the molecule that transports oxygen from the lungs to the tissues. The hemoglobin resides within the red blood cell. On the surface of the red blood cells are other extremely important molecules called antigens. These antigens determine the blood type.
There are only two types of antigens; they are designated as either A or B. A person with type A blood will have A antigens on his red blood cells; type B blood has B antigens; type AB blood has both A and B antigens; and type O blood possesses neither antigen.
Landsteiner also discovered another antigen in the blood, the D antigen. Whether a person has this antigen is known as the rhesus or Rh factor because Landsteiner’s studies were performed in rhesus monkeys. The presence of this factor in a person’s red blood cells means he has Rh-positive blood, and if not, it is Rh-negative blood. Thus, a person with type A positive blood possesses the A antigen and the Rh (D) antigen on their red blood cells. Persons who are type O negative have neither the A, B, nor Rh antigen on his red blood cells.
Another important factor is that the serum contains specialized proteins called antibodies. The key point in understanding blood typing is that for every antigen there is a corresponding antibody. An antibody is highly specific in that it only recognizes and reacts with its specific antigen and not with any other. When an antibody meets its matching antigen, it combines with it to form an antigen-antibody complex. This reaction is what causes transfusion reactions and is the basis for the blood-typing procedure.
BLOOD MATCHING AND TYPING 
As stated above, the surfaces of red blood cells possess either A or B antigens, both, or neither. The serum contains antibodies that are termed either anti-A or anti-B, depending upon which antigen they recognize. That is, if an anti-A antibody comes into contact with an A antigen, a reaction will occur. Since it is highly specific for the A antigen, it will not react with a B antigen.
These anti-A and anti-B antibodies are found in the serum, but which one, if any, a person has depends upon his blood type. Logically, a person with type A blood cannot possess anti-A antibodies, since this would lead to an antigen-antibody reaction that would be deadly. So, each person has antibodies that are directed against the blood antigens that differ from the ones on her own red blood cells.
That is, if a person has antigen A on his red blood cells (type A blood), he then has anti-B antibodies in his serum (see Figure 9-1). If he has antigen B (type B blood), then he has anti-A antibodies in his serum. Likewise, a person with both A and B antigens (type AB blood) has neither anti-A nor anti-B antibodies. And a person with neither A nor B antigens (type O blood) has both anti-A and anti-B antibodies.
TYPE 
ANTIGENS ON RBCS 
ANTIBODIES IN SERUM
A 
A 
Anti-B 
B 
B 
Anti-A 
AB 
AB 
None 
O 
Neither 
Anti-A and anti-B 
But type O blood is considered to be the “universal donor.” This means that in situations where time does not allow for cross matching, type O is given. But, even though type O possesses both anti-A and anti-B antibodies, it does not react with blood types A, B, and AB because the red blood cell antigens of the donor react with the serum antibodies of the recipient to cause transfusion reactions. Since type O has no red blood cell antigens, no reaction occurs.
The reaction of the recipient’s serum antibodies with the red blood cell antigens of the donor’s blood is what causes transfusion reactions. For example, a person with type A blood cannot receive a transfusion of type B blood without risking a severe reaction; he has anti-B antibodies in his serum, so if he is given type B blood, these anti-B antibodies will immediately react with the B antigens on the red blood cells of the donor’s blood. This is a transfusion reaction and results is agglutination, or clumping, of the blood cells, which can lead to rashes, kidney damage, and death.
Figure 9-1: Blood type antigens and antibodies. In a person with type A blood, A antigens cover the surface of red blood cells. The serum would contain anti-B antibodies, which would not react with the A antigens but would react with B antigens found on types B or AB blood. 
Agglutination occurs because the serum antibodies are bivalent. This means that they have two reactive ends. If each end of the antibody reacts with a red blood cell surface antigen, it forms a complex of two red blood cells and one antibody. Sort of like a dumbbell, with the red blood cells being the two end-weights and the antibody the handle. As the reaction continues, the red blood cells are bound into a latticework and clump together (see Figure 9-2).
Blood typing makes use of this reaction. Serum that contains antibodies is called antiserum (plural is antisera). If the serum contains anti-A antibodies, it is called anti-A serum; if it contains anti-B antibodies, it is anti-B serum. In the lab, these two types of antisera are used to determine blood type.
Figure 9-2: Antigen-antibody agglutination reaction. If type B blood is transfused into a type A individual, the anti-B antibodies in the serum of the recipient react with the B antigens on the surface of the red blood cells in the transfused blood, causing the cells to agglutinate, or clump together. 
For example, if a given blood sample agglutinates when exposed to anti-A serum but not with anti-B serum, the cells contain only antigen-A and the blood type of the sample is A. Similarly, if the sample reacts only to anti-B serum and not anti-A serum, it is type B. If it reacts to both, it is type AB, since this would mean that the red blood cells possess both the A and the B antigens. Finally, if it reacts to neither, the red blood cells possess neither antigen and the type is O.
REACTS TO ANTISERA 
BLOOD TYPE
A only 
A 
B only 
B 
Both A and B 
AB 
Neither A nor B 
O 
Remember these two key points:
1. The antisera contain antibodies that “test for” or react with antigens on the red blood cells.
2. The antigen (or antigens) on the red blood cells determine the blood type. 
This means that which antisera react with a particular blood sample reveals which antigens are present and thus the blood type of the sample.
The serologist tests each submitted crime scene sample separately and determines the type of each. In situations where more than one person shed blood, this information may help with crime scene reconstruction. Blood typing was critical to crime scene reconstruction in the Jeffrey MacDonald case.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE JEFFREY MACDONALD CASE 
At 3:40 A.M. on the morning of February 17, 1970, U.S. Army Captain Dr. Jeffrey MacDonald called the military police (MPs) to his home at Fort Bragg, North Carolina. They found MacDonald lying on his bedroom floor next to his wife, Colette. He wore only blue pajama bottoms, its matching pajama top spread across Colette’s chest. She had been brutally and repeatedly stabbed to death. Above them on the bed’s headboard was the single word “pig” written in blood. Down the hall the bodies of the two MacDonald children, five-year-old Kimberly and two-year-old Kristen, lay in pools of blood. Only Jeffrey MacDonald was alive, having suffered only a single knife wound to his chest.
MacDonald stated that he was asleep on the living room sofa when he heard Colette screaming. He was immediately attacked by three men and a woman, who he described as hippies and who chanted, “Acid is groovy, kill the pigs,” while they slashed him with a knife. They tore his pajama top, which he then used to parry the thrusts from the knives. He was ultimately knocked unconscious, then later awoke to find his family slaughtered. He attempted mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on each of his daughters. He then found Colette with a knife protruding from her chest. He removed the knife, covered her with his pajama top, and phoned the MPs.
The MPs were immediately suspicious. Why were MacDonald’s injuries minimal while his family had been severely brutalized? Colette had been stabbed over thirty times; Kristen and Kimberly were beaten and repeatedly stabbed. Another question the MPs had was why was the living room, where four people allegedly attacked MacDonald, so neat? Only an upended coffee table and a turned-over flowerpot were out of place. And how could MacDonald, who needed glasses to correct his poor vision, provide such detailed descriptions of four assailants whom he only saw in the dark? Why was the torn fingertip of a latex surgical glove found in Jeffrey and Colette’s bloodstained bed? Interestingly, the MPs found a copy of Esquire magazine with an article on the recent Manson family murders in the living room. In these murders, messages, including the word “pig,” also had been written in blood at the crime scenes.
Unfortunately, the investigation was less than perfect and evidence was lost, so charges against MacDonald were dropped. The story might have ended there, except that MacDonald went on The Dick Cavett Show and berated the military, accusing them of gross incompetence. This led to a renewed interest in him.
The FBI entered the investigation and turned up a wealth of information. First, in a coincidence that defies odds, each family member had a different blood type. This allowed investigators to track the movements of each, particularly those of Jeffrey MacDonald. His blood was found in small quantities in only three places: on his glasses in the living room, on a cabinet where a box of surgical gloves were stored, and on the bathroom sink, where investigators believe he inflicted his own minor wound. There was no blood, or even fingerprints, on the two phones he used to call for help. Also, no prints were found on the knife that MacDonald said he had removed from his wife’s chest, nor were any prints on the knife and ice pick found outside near the back door. Had they been wiped clean?
Blue fibers from MacDonald’s pajamas were found everywhere. Almost. They were in the two girls’ rooms and all over, around, and even beneath Colette’s body. Yet, none were found in the living room, where MacDonald was allegedly attacked and the shirt was ripped.
But the most damning evidence came from the FBI’s crime lab. Analysts showed that the holes in the blue pajama top exactly matched the wounds to Colette when the garment was folded over her chest. More importantly, each of the punctures was round and smooth, indicating that the garment was stationary when the blows were struck. Had the top been in motion as it would have been if MacDonald were using it for defense, it would have shown ragged and irregular holes.
Lastly, Collette’s blood had stained both halves of the torn pajama top. When the two pieces were placed side by side, like two adjacent pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, the stain pattern matched, suggesting that the stain occurred before the top was torn. This directly contradicted MacDonald’s statement that he had placed the pajama top over his wife’s body after it was torn.
In July 1979, nearly a decade after the murders, Jeffrey MacDonald went on trial for the triple murder and received three consecutive life terms.
BLOOD AND THE SEROLOGIST  
Fresh blood is usually red, but what does a bloodstain look like? Is it red or purple or brown? Can it be confused with grease, paint, or chocolate? The truth is that its color depends upon its age and what conditions it has been exposed to. Sometimes blood looks like chocolate and chocolate looks like blood. Even to the experienced eye, bloodstains may look like stains left by many other materials. When the serologist analyzes a liquid sample or a stain that could be blood, he must answer three questions:
• Is it blood?
• Is it human blood?
• Whose blood is it? 
His first task is to determine if the specimen is blood or some other rusty brown stain such as oil, paint, or ketchup. If the stain isn’t blood, no further testing is required, but once the serologist is sure that blood is present, he must determine if it is human or not. After that, he must match it to a suspect if it is to be of forensic value.
For blood to be useful to the serologist, it must be found in sufficient amounts and in good enough condition to allow testing. Many modern techniques require only minute amounts of blood, but if the blood is severely degraded, even large quantities may prove useless. Many chemicals can damage blood to the point that typing and DNA profiling can’t be performed. Also putrefaction, which is due to bacterial growth, can degrade the sample beyond repair. Since warmth and moisture promote bacterial growth, putrefaction proceeds much more rapidly in warm and wet conditions. In cooler and drier areas, the blood is less likely to decay and the dried stain may last for decades, even centuries.
If the serologist obtains a usable sample, he possesses many analytical tools that will tell him if the sample is indeed blood.
IS IT BLOOD?
Testing a liquid or stain to determine if it is blood is not new. The microscope has been used for this purpose for centuries, since visually identifying blood cells is proof positive that the substance is blood. Of course, the blood must be in a liquid state, since clotted blood or dry bloodstains contain no identifiable cells. Several other tests appeared in the late 1800s, including Ambrose Tardieu’s olfactory test. He set out to prove that blood could be identified by its distinctive smell. He failed, though, because the sense of smell is too variable and unreliable in this regard.
Like microscopic examination, the old hematin test, developed in 1853 by Polish scientist Ludwig Teichmann (1823–1895), also required liquid blood. In this test, the suspected blood sample was mixed with acetic acid and salt crystals, heated and viewed under a microscope for the presence of the characteristic rhomboid crystals. This test is similar to the present-day Teichmann and Takayama tests, which we’ll look at shortly 
Dutch scientist Izaak van Deen (1804–1869) developed the guaiacum test in 1862. Guaiac comes from the resin of a West Indian shrub and was the best test of its time. It is also the precursor of the present day phenolphthalein test. In the guaiacum test, the suspected blood sample was mixed with hydrogen peroxide and guaiacum and, if it were indeed blood, a blue color would appear. In fact, in the very first Sherlock Holmes novel, A Study in Scarlet, published in 1887, Holmes used a similar test to identify a stain as blood.
In 1863, German scientist Christian Friedrich Schönbein (1799–1868) developed another simple screening test for liquid blood when he found that hydrogen peroxide would oxidize blood in a reaction that produced foam.
Each of these tests proved useful for testing liquid blood, but most blood samples obtained at crime scenes are dried. The advantage of dried blood is that it is much more resistant to decay than is liquid blood. But it presented a major problem for investigators. How could they identify the dried stain as blood? The microscope was useless since dried blood had no intact cells to view. All the above tests offered no help since they required liquid blood. Obviously, other techniques were needed and many were developed, some of which have been around for over one hundred years.
To determine if a given sample is blood, the serologist conducts tests of two basic types: presumptive and confirmatory. Presumptive tests are typically cheaper and faster. When results are negative, the sample is not blood, and no further, more expensive testing is necessary. When positive, they indicate that blood is likely present, but do not absolutely establish that as fact. That requires confirmatory testing.
Presumptive Tests 
Presumptive tests for blood fall into two broad categories: those that yield a color reaction and those that cause a fluorescent (glowing) reaction. Those that cause a color change are benzidine, o-toluidine, phenolphthalein, tetramethylbenzidine, and leucomalachite green. Those that cause fluorescence include fluorescein and luminol.
Tests That Cause a Color Change 
Benzidine and o-toluidine (3.3’Dimethylbenzidine) are no longer used, though at one time they were very popular. Benzidine was the chemical in the old Adler test, which was developed in 1904 by Oskar and Rudolf Adler. When applied to a bloodstain, it would become blue, and then slowly turn brown. O-toluidine was the original chemical on Hemastix, which were manufactured by Miles Laboratories. These dip-sticks were used to test urine samples for the presence of blood. O-toluidine also yields a blue color when exposed to blood. However, by the mid-1970s, both benzidine and o-toluidine were found to be potentially carcinogenic (cancer producing) and faded out of use.
Phenolphthalein is the active compound in the popular Kastle-Meyer color test. The reaction in this test rests on the fact that the hemoglobin in blood possesses what is called a peroxidase-like property. Peroxidases are enzymes that accelerate the oxidation of certain compounds by peroxides. One such compound is phenolphthalein. When blood, phenolphthalein, and hydrogen peroxide come together, the hemoglobin in the blood causes the peroxide to react with the phenolphthalein and produces a dark pink color. The major advantage of the Kastle-Meyer test is that the reaction is very quick, with the color change appearing within a minute or two. The major disadvantage is that certain vegetable products, such as potatoes and horseradish, may also cause the reaction to occur. Of course, potatoes and horseradish are not typically found at scenes where blood has been shed.
Tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) was derived from benzidine after the latter was proved to cause cancer and also replaced o-toluidine in Hemastix. At a crime scene, the presumed bloodstain is sampled with a moistened cotton-tipped swab and then applied to the Hemastix strip. If it immediately turns blue-green, blood may be present.
Leucomalachite green (LMG) has been available since the early 1900s. When in contact with blood, it produces a green color.
Tests That Fluoresce 
Fluorescein has also been used since the early 1900s. It reacts with the hemoglobin (the iron-containing molecule) in red blood cells and glows when exposed to ultraviolet light. At the crime scene, it is sprayed where blood is believed to be, the lights are lowered, and an ultraviolet light source is directed over the area. Bloodstains will glow in the dark. Not only can the likely presence of blood be established, but also its area of distribution can be clearly defined. Spurts, spatters, drag marks, and foot and handprints jump into view.
Fluorescein has two advantages over luminol, which is discussed below. It does not react with household bleach, as does luminol, which makes it better suited for stains that have been cleaned up. Perpetrators often attempt to scrub walls and floors clean in the erroneous assumption that if the blood can’t be seen it can’t be found. Fortunately, that’s not true. Another advantage of fluorscein is that it is a thicker liquid than luminol and tends to drip less. This means it will stick better to walls, doors, and other vertical surfaces.
Luminol (3-aminophthalhydrazide) also reacts with the blood’s hemoglobin and fluoresces under ultraviolet light. It is also applied by spraying and is viewed under ultraviolet light after the area has been darkened. As with fluorescein, it can reveal bloodstain patterns.
Its major advantage is that it is extremely sensitive and can reveal blood that is present in extremely small amounts, as little as one part per ten million or less. Unless chlorine bleach or a chlorine-containing cleaning fluid was used, luminol can detect blood in areas that have been thoroughly cleaned, and even on walls that have been painted over. Though it may interfere with some serological testing procedures, it does not affect later typing or DNA analysis.
When luminol is used, the area is darkened. Indoors, the lights are turned off and the window shades drawn. Outdoors or in rooms that cannot be darkened, waiting for nightfall might be necessary. Once dark, the examiners put on protective goggles, spray the area with luminol, and look for areas that glow. The fluorescence appears immediately and fades quickly so photographs or videos are used to capture the images of the blood patterns.
Using luminol, it is often possible to track the movements of the perpetrator by following his bloody shoeprints. Shoes that appear clean but hold minute traces of blood do not leave visible prints, but their tracks glow brightly under the influence of luminol.
Confirmatory Tests 
Once one of the presumptive tests indicates that blood is likely present, a confirmatory test is used to confirm or deny that fact.
The most commonly used confirmatory tests are the Teichmann test and the Takayama test. Both rely on a reaction between a chemical and the hemoglobin molecule found within the red blood cells. This reaction results in the formation of crystals, which are then viewed under a microscope. A major advantage of both tests is that they work well with very old stains.
The Teichmann test involves the heating of the suspected blood sample with acetic acid and a chloride compound, which causes the chloride compound to react with the blood’s hemoglobin to produce a hemoglobin-chloride crystalline compound. Under the microscope, brown, rhomboid-shaped crystals are seen if the substance is indeed blood. Care must be taken not to overheat the preparation or the crystal-forming reaction may not occur.
To perform the test, the sample is placed on a glass slide and the acetic acid-chloride solution is added. The slide is then carefully heated. If blood is present, crystals, which can be seen under the microscope, quickly form.
The Takayama test (also called the pyridine test), developed by Masaeo Takayama in 1912, is performed in a similar manner, except that the suspect sample is heated with pyridine and glucose (sugar). The reaction that occurs causes the formation of pyridine ferriprotoporphyrin or hemochromogen crystals, which are viewed under a microscope.
Once confirmatory testing has proven that the sample is blood, the next step is to determine whether it is human blood or that of another species.
IS IT HUMAN BLOOD?
Humans aren’t the only creatures that shed blood at a crime scene. It falls to the serologist to determine if the blood is human or from a dog, cat, or some other animal. Only after this determination is made can further testing be done to discover whose blood it is.
The technique for distinguishing human blood from animal blood dates to 1901 when German professor Paul Uhlenhuth (1870–1957) published a paper on his precipitin method. Similar to the typing of blood, the tests used for species determination are antigen-antibody reactions. The difference is that an antiserum that reacts with antigens specific for humans rather than with the A and B red blood cell antigens must be created. That is, a specific antibody to a specific human antigen is created and the resulting reaction, or lack of reaction, determines whether the blood is human. In that same year, Uhlenhuth was called on to use his new test in a double murder case.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: LUDWIG TESSNOW AND THE WEREWOLF MURDERS 
In 1901, the battered and dismembered bodies of two young boys were found on the German coastal island of Rugen. The victims had been ripped apart and their limbs scattered far and wide. One boy’s heart was missing and the skulls of both had been crushed. The murder weapon appeared to be a bloodstained stone. Ludwig Tess-now, who had been seen earlier with the boys, was arrested and a search of his home turned up clothing with suspicious dark stains. Tessnow said they were wood dye stains. Interestingly, this was the same thing he had said about some clothing stains three years earlier when he was suspected in the murder and dismemberment of two young girls in Osnabruck, Germany. Even more bizarre, a local farmer said he had seen a man who looked like Tessnow fleeing from his fields after ripping the limbs from several of his sheep. Though it is unclear whether the term was ever applied to Tessnow, these types of savage killings of humans and animals were often believed to be the work of werewolves and were sometimes called Werewolf Killings.
The police investigating the deaths of the two young boys knew of Professor Uhlenhuth’s new test and asked for his help. He did, indeed, find wood dye on Tessnow’s clothing, but he also found both human and sheep blood. Tessnow was convicted and executed.
Developing and Using an Antiserum 
In order to determine if the blood in question is human, an anti-human serum that only reacts with uniquely human antigens must be created. To do this, the human antigen (human blood) is injected into a rabbit or other animal and then enough time is allowed for the animal to produce sufficient antibodies against the antigen. The animal’s blood, which is now rich in anti-human antibodies, is removed and the antiserum is isolated. This antiserum can now be used to test blood samples and determine if they are from humans.
In the laboratory, if a solution containing an antiserum is brought into contact with one containing the antigen it was designed to react against, a reaction will occur. This reaction produces an antigen-antibody complex that precipitates or falls out of solution. This results in a visible line of precipitation along the line of contact between the two solutions. For example, if the antiserum to human blood made with the rabbit contacts a solution that contains human blood, the reaction occurs and a visible line of precipitation results. On the other hand, if the blood is not human, no reaction occurs and no line of precipitation is seen.
The contact between the two solutions can be accomplished by simple diffusion or by electrophoresis. With simple diffusion, the two liquids are placed in contact or near contact with each other, and they simply flow toward each other by the laws of diffusion. The precipitation reaction will occur along the line of contact. Electrophoresis is the application of an electric current to the test material. This quickens the rate of movement of the components of each solution and thus hastens the precipitation reaction. Either way, the reaction is highly specific for human blood.
The most commonly used tests for human blood are the ring precipitin test, the Ouchterlony double diffusion test, crossover electrophoresis, and anti-human hemoglobin. The first three use antisera to human blood proteins, while the latter uses an antiserum to human hemoglobin.
RING PRECIPITIN TEST: In this test, the anti-human antiserum is placed in a test tube. The blood sample is dissolved in a liquid and carefully poured into the tube. It will float over the denser antiserum much as vinegar floats above the oil in many salad dressings. If the sample is human blood, a reaction occurs and a thin white band of solid precipitate forms at the interface of the liquids. If not, no precipitate ring is seen.
OUCHTERLONY DOUBLE DIFFUSION TEST: This test uses a gel agar plate. This is a plastic plate that contains a jelly-like gel. Wells (holes) are arranged in the gel so that there is a central well surrounded by an array of other wells. The antiserum is placed in the center well and the samples to be tested are placed in the surrounding ones. Each solution slowly diffuses outward in every direction. This leads to several lines of contact with the central solution and each of the surrounding solutions. Each sample solution that contains human blood yields a faint line of precipitation along the line of contact. Those that do not contain human blood show no such reaction.
CROSSOVER ELECTROPHORESIS: A gel plate is also used in this test, except that in this case two rows of wells are cut into the gel. The antiserum is placed in all the wells of one row and the samples are placed in the rows opposite them. An electrical current is applied, which causes the two liquids to move toward each other. As with the other tests, a positive result is indicated by a line of precipitation along the line of contact.
ANTI-HUMAN HEMOGLOBIN: This test utilizes an antiserum that specifically reacts with human hemoglobin. Unfortunately, these are often only primate specific and not human specific. It can discriminate between human and dog or cat blood but not human and gorilla blood. Its major advantage is that it can be used with very old and degraded samples. But, unless the location where the blood is found is known to house a gorilla or other primate, a positive test means the blood is human.
The modern crime lab contains antisera to a variety of common animals’ blood, such as dog, cat, deer, cow, and sheep. Using these, the serologist can determine the species that shed the blood. This may be important evidence in and of itself.
WHOSE BLOOD IS IT?
Once the serologist has determined that the blood is human, he will set about trying to discover whose it is. The first step is to determine its type. This is similar to the typing protocol described earlier in this chapter with one major exception. Standard blood typing utilizes liquid blood and a positive reaction is indicated by agglutination or clumping of the red blood cells. This means that agglutination can only occur if the blood is liquid and if the red blood cells are intact.
But, as I said earlier, crime scene blood is more likely to be either clotted or a dried stain. When blood clots, the red blood cells break up, and if they are not intact they can’t agglutinate, which means that any antigen-antiserum reaction can’t be verified. Even though the blood in the stain has clotted, dried, and the RBCs have disintegrated, the antigens on the surface of the red blood cells remain. They simply need to be extracted for testing.
The serologist makes use of these facts by employing the clever absorptionelution technique. This technique offers a roundabout or indirect way for determining exactly what antigens are present in the bloodstain, which will in turn reveal the blood type.
Absorption-elution is a four-step process.
STEP 1: The bloodstained material is treated with blood antisera. The antibodies in the antisera combine with and are bound to the antigens.
STEP 2: The material is then washed to remove any excess antiserum. This leaves behind the blood antigens and the specific antibodies to those particular antigens.
STEP 3: The sample then undergoes elution. This is a process whereby the sample is heated to 56ºC. This breaks the antigen-antibody bond and frees the antigen and the antibodies from one another.
STEP 4: The eluted antibodies are then tested against known blood antigens and their reaction is observed. Because of the extreme specificity of antibodies for a particular antigen, whichever antigens the antibodies react with must be identical to the antigens present in the original unknown sample.
Let’s say the serologist is confronted with a bloodstained shirt. He has determined that the blood is human and goes through the above steps. Let’s assume the stain is from a type A individual. In the first step, both anti-A and anti-B serums are added. The stain has only A antigens and so only reacts with the anti-A antibodies in the anti-A serum. It does not react with the anti-B antibodies of the anti-B serum. After washing, only the complex of the stain’s A antigens and the anti-A antibodies remain. Elution separates these two, freeing the anti-A antibodies from the stain. Testing these antibodies against blood samples of known type result in a reaction only to type A blood. This means that the original sample must also have been type A.
Using the Results 
Simply determining the ABO type of the blood at a crime scene can narrow the suspect list and completely exonerate some suspects. For example, the population distribution of the four ABO types is:
If the blood is AB, it will narrow the focus to 3 percent of the population and will exonerate any suspects with types A, B, or O. Of course, everyone with type AB blood could still be considered suspect.
By adding the Rh factor to the mix, the serologist can narrow the list further. The approximate percentages of people with the various ABO-Rh combinations are:
This means that if the blood found at the scene is AB-Neg, 99 percent of the population has been eliminated as the source of the blood. But that’s not the end of it since the serologist has a few other tools to further individualize the sample. It has been discovered that red blood cells contain more proteins, enzymes, and antigens than just the A and B antigens. These include antigens with such catchy names as Duffy, Kell, and Kidd, and intracellular enzymes such as adenylate kinase, erythrocyte acid phosphatase, and the very useful phosphoglucomutase (PGM). Each of these also has a known distribution in the population. Let’s take a closer look at PGM.
Many enzymes are polymorphic, which means that they come in varying forms. These polymorphic types are called isoenzymes. PGM comes in many different isoenzymes with at least ten of them being fairly common. As with ABO antigens, these enzymes are inherited independently. This means that regardless of ABO type, a particular individual could have any combination of the isoenzymes of PGM. The serologist can use this fact to further narrow the list of suspects who could have left a particular bloodstain.
For example, let’s say a stain has been found to be ABO type AB-Neg and to possess PGM 2. The AB-Negative blood type is found in only 1 percent of the population and PGM 2 is found in only 6 percent of people. Since these two factors are inherited independently, the probability of a particular individual being type AB-Neg, PGM 2 is only 0.06 percent or about 6 per 10,000.
The math: 6% = 0.06 and 1% = 0.01
0.06 × 0.01 = .0006 or 0.06% 
If the police find a suspect that possesses type AB, PGM 2 blood, the probability that he is the perpetrator is 6 in 10,000, or 1 per 1,667 people. Not perfect, but better than ABO typing alone. Though too involved to cover in this book, there are several other blood enzymes and proteins that can be used in a similar manner to further whittle at the suspect list. DNA testing, which will be discussed in the next chapter, can then be used to further individualize the sample.
PATERNITY TESTING  
Each of us inherits our blood type from our parents, which allows the serologist to use ABO blood typing to assess paternity in many cases. To understand how this works, let’s look at a thumbnail sketch of some genetics basics.
BASIC GENETICS 
Essentially all of our cells contain genetic material, which we call DNA. Our DNA is packed into units we call genes, which are the basic units of inheritance. The genes are arranged on thread-like structures we call chromosomes. Humans have forty-six chromosomes that are arranged into twenty-three pairs. On each chromosome every gene has its own specific location, which we call a locus (pleural is loci). When the chromosomes pair up, so do these loci. This means that our genes pair up in what is called an allelic pair.
Each of the genes in an allelic pair can be, and usually are, different. And they usually possess different “strengths.” That is, one will have a greater say in the particular trait governed by the pair than will the other. We call the stronger of the two dominant and the weaker recessive. So in any gene pair, one gene may be dominant and the other recessive. Some genes are of equal strength and are termed co-dominant, meaning that they are equally powerful in their expression and neither “takes a back seat.”
Blood Type Inheritance 
There are two other important terms to consider. Phenotype is what we look like physically or how a gene is expressed. Genotype is what our genes are like. In blood grouping, the phenotype is simply the blood type. This can be A, B, AB, or O. But this blood type does not tell us the genotype, or what gene alleles the person actually possesses.
Our ABO blood groups, or phenotypes, come in only four types: A, B, AB, O. But, for some of these four types there are two possible gene pairings, or genotypes. It is important to know that in this system, A and B are co-dominant while O is recessive. This means that a person who receives an A gene from one parent and an O gene from the other will have type A blood, but not type O, since the A gene is dominant.
At conception, we receive one ABO gene from each parent and this allelic pairing of genes (genotype) determines what blood type (phenotype) we will express.
PHENOTYPE 
POSSIBLE GENOTYPES
A 
AA or AO 
B 
BB or BO 
AB 
AB 
O 
OO 
As you can see, individuals with type O blood must have an OO genotype. They can’t possess either an A or a B gene since this would dominate the O gene and produce either type A or type B blood, respectively. This means that they received an O gene from each parent.
A type A person could have received an A gene from each parent (and thus would be an AA genotype) or an A gene from one and an O gene from the other (an AO genotype). Remember, A is the dominant allele, so when it is paired with the recessive O gene, the A gene is the one that is expressed. Outwardly, the AA and the AO individual would be the same in that each would have type A blood when tested. But genetically, they would be different. One would have an AA allelic pairing and the other an AO.
From this you can see that a type A parent who is AA can only give an A gene to their offspring since all their eggs or sperm have an A gene. But, a type A parent who is AO could give either an A or an O gene since half their eggs or sperm would be A and the other half O. If both parents are type A, there are several possibilities for the genotype, and thus the phenotype, of their offspring. These are:
Both parents AA: 
Child must be AA 
One parent AA and other AO 
Child can be either AA or AO 
Both parents AO 
Child can be AA, AO, or OO 
The same situation exists if both parents are type B. Simply substitute B for A in the above pairings.
If both parents are type O (genotype by definition OO), they can only have type O (genotype OO) children, since neither has an A nor a B gene to donate.
DETERMINING PATERNITY 
Blood typing can exclude paternity, but cannot absolutely verify it. For example, a man with type AB blood could not father a child with type O blood. If the child in question possessed type O blood (genotype OO), the type AB man (genotype AB) could not be the father of the child and he would be excluded from consideration. A type A (genotype AA or AO) man could be the father, but only if he were an AO genotype. If he were AA, he would also be excluded. But, even if he is AO, he still may not be the father. He simply cannot be excluded.
Another genetic marker, the human leukocyte antigen (HLA), can also be useful in paternity testing. HLA is the same antigen that plays a major role in matching transplant donors with recipients. If the father and child share the same HLA markers, there is a 90 percent chance of paternity. If testing combines HLA and ABO typing with another genetic marker called haptoglobin, the accuracy approaches 95 percent.
However, DNA matching, which offers 99 percent certainty when properly done, is the gold standard for assessing paternity.
OTHER BODY FLUIDS  
Though blood is the most common biological fluid found at the crime scene, semen, saliva, and, rarely, vaginal fluid are also seen. During sexual assaults, the attacker’s semen and saliva are commonly transferred to the victim, the victim’s clothing, or nearby surfaces. Saliva can be obtained from the stamp and envelope of a threatening letter or an extortion or ransom note. Cigarette butts and food items found at crime scenes can yield saliva from which DNA can be obtained. Even tearstains have yielded usable DNA.
But before these materials can reach the lab and undergo analysis, they must be located. Sometimes stains are apparent; other times they are invisible to the naked eye. The first and simplest step in locating these fluids is an examination of the crime scene with an alternative light source (ALS). This simply means any light source that isn’t standard ambient sun or room light. Under alternative sources, such as laser or ultraviolet light, these fluids will often fluoresce (glow).
Once located, these materials must be carefully collected and preserved. If the sample is moist, it must be air dried before packaging, since moist, biological materials are susceptible to putrefaction from bacterial growth. If already dried, the sample can simply be packaged. For example, if panties are found at the scene of an alleged rape, they will be collected for analysis. If a stain is seen and it is dry, the garment can be packaged for transport. If still damp, it is hung up, allowed to dry, and then placed in a paper evidence bag. Plastic is not used since it tends to hold any residual moisture and can cause decay of the sample, where a paper bag will “breathe” somewhat.
Let’s look at how several common biological fluids are located, identified, and analyzed.
SEMEN 
Semen is an exclusively male fluid that comes from ejaculation. It consists of fluids from the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland as well as spermatozoa. There is an exception, however. The semen of men who suffer from oligospermia (low sperm count) or azoospermia (no sperm) may possess little or no sperm. The same is true if the man has undergone a successful vasectomy.
At the scene of a sexual assault (see Chapter Seven: Bodily Harm, “Rape Investigation”), a search for semen includes the corpse (in cases of murder), underwear, condoms, bed sheets, mattresses, carpeting, and flooring. In the case of a corpse, all body orifices are tested for semen residue. The victim’s clothing is collected, dried if necessary, and placed in clean paper bags for transport. The same is done with the suspect’s clothing (if one is identified) as well as bed sheets or the surface where the assault occurred (if possible). Sofas, countertops, carpets, car seats, and other places where rape could have occurred may not be easily transported. Sometimes an entire sofa or car seat will be taken to the lab; other times sections of carpet or a countertop may be removed.
As discussed in Chapter Seven, it is important that a living victim undergo a rape exam by a physician. The sooner after the event this is done, the better, as biological evidence tends to degrade and diminish over time. The physician performing the exam looks for and documents any signs of trauma or orifice penetration. All samples taken are documented and controlled by a police officer so that the chain of evidence remains unbroken.
As with other testing, the tests for semen are either presumptive or confirmatory. Presumptive testing is based on the fact that semen contains a very high level of the enzyme acid phosphatase. Confirmatory testing relies on demonstrating the presence of spermatozoa or prostate-specific antigen (PSA).
Presumptive Testing: The Brentamine Fast Blue Test 
Acid phosphatase (AP) enzymes are a class of proteins that are very common in nature and are found in many animals and plants. Semen contains a high level of acid phosphatase, which is produced by the seminal vesicles. This type of acid phosphatase, called seminal AP (SAP), was discovered in 1935 by W. Kutscher and H. Wolbergs. When SAP is found in a crime-scene fluid sample or stain, it provides presumptive evidence that semen is indeed present. Unfortunately, certain fruit and vegetable juices such as watermelon and cauliflower, some fungi, contraceptive creams, and even vaginal fluid itself can give a false-positive acid phosphatase test.
Many methods for semen identification have been devised over the years, but the Brentamine Fast Blue test is currently the primary presumptive test used. Typically, a moist cotton swab or piece of filter paper is used to collect the sample, which is then treated with a combination of alpha-naphthyl phosphate and Brentamine Fast Blue. If a bright purple color appears within two minutes, the test is positive. The above-mentioned substances that can lead to a false positive tend to react very slowly, while SAP reacts quickly. If the color change is strong and occurs within thirty seconds, the identification of semen is virtually certain.
Other, less-used, presumptive tests search for the presence of two other components of semen: spermine and choline. Each of these tests is positive if crystals form after the sample is exposed to certain chemicals. The Florence test uses potassium triiodide and tests for choline while the Barberio test uses picric acid and tests for spermine. If either of these tests is positive, semen is likely present.
Confirmatory Testing 
If one of the presumptive tests suggests the presence of semen, one or more of the confirmatory tests are then done. The two most commonly used are microscopic examination and prostate-specific antigen.
Microscopic Examination 
Since spermatozoa are present only in semen, finding them is absolute proof that semen is present. Antony Van Leeuwenhoek first described the presence of spermatozoa in semen in 1679 and by the mid-1980s finding motile sperm was the method of choice for semen identification. It remains so today.
The sample is placed on a microscope slide and treated with one of several stains. A commonly used one is a combination of nuclear fast red solution and picroindigocarmine (PIC), which stains the spermatozoa red and makes them readily visible. The viewer typically will see a combination of intact and fragmented spermatozoa. The finding of a single sperm or sperm head confirms that the sample is semen.
The sperm do not have to be motile (moving), merely present. In the living victim, motility of sperm is usually lost within four to six hours after the semen is deposited.
Prostate-Specific Antigen (PSA) 
If no spermatozoa are seen, the examiner must resort to testing for prostate-specific antigen (PSA or p30), which is highly concentrated in semen. It was first identified as a useful test for semen in 1978 by George Sensabaugh.
Testing involves an antigen-antibody reaction and is quick and simple. When PSA is found, it confirms the presence of semen. Though vasectomy and one of the low-sperm-count syndromes mentioned above may markedly reduce or completely eliminate spermatozoa from the semen, it has no effect on the PSA level. This is because PSA is produced in the prostate gland, which lies “downstream” from where the vasectomy procedure is done.
This test is highly specific for semen and is very sensitive in that very old semen stains can often be analyzed for PSA. In many cases, even if the clothing or bed sheets have been washed, PSA can still be detected.
Once the presence of semen is confirmed, the serologist attempts to match the semen to a particular individual by using ABO blood typing and DNA analysis. Usable DNA depends on whether the sample is damaged or degraded, and ABO blood typing requires that the perpetrator be a secretor.
Secretor Status 
A secretor is someone who secretes his ABO proteins in other body fluids. A non-secretor does not. Approximately 80 to 85 percent of individuals are secretors. Their body fluids, including seminal fluid, saliva, and tears, contain proteins that reflect their ABO blood type. Non-secretors have no such proteins in these fluids. In rape cases, the material swabbed from the vagina of the victim is a mixture of fluids from the victim and the attacker. The ABO types found in this fluid can be used much as blood typing to eliminate a suspect in a rape, but cannot accurately identify him.
Secretors with blood type A secrete type A antigens in their saliva, semen, vaginal secretions, and other body fluids; blood type B persons secrete type B antigens; blood type AB individuals secrete both A and B antigens; and persons with type O blood secrete neither. Non-secretors, likewise, secrete no antigens, so in this regard they are similar to type O individuals. Non-secretors may have any of the four blood types, but since they do not secrete their ABO antigens in their body fluids, their blood type cannot be determined without a blood sample.
It is important to note that secretor status has no bearing on whether DNA testing can be done. DNA can be obtained from the semen of both secretors and non-secretors.
Let’s suppose that a rape victim is a secretor of type B, while the prime suspect is a secretor of type A. Let’s further suppose that semen is found in the victim’s vaginal swab and when tested shows only type B antigens. These B antigens could have come from the victim, the perpetrator, or both. But, the prime suspect is not the attacker since he is a type A secretor and would have left behind type A antigens. He is exonerated and the police must now search for a suspect who is type B, type O, or a non-secretor. That is, the perpetrator either left behind B antigens (type B) or no antigens at all (type O or non-secretor status). In the later case, the B antigens found would be from the victim.
Similarly, if the victim is a type A secretor and the vaginal swab reveals types A and B, the perpetrator must be either type B or type AB. He cannot be type O or a non-secretor, since the type B antigen could not have come from the victim and must have come from the attacker.
If the victim is type O and no antigens are found in the vaginal smears, then the perpetrator must be either type O or a non-secretor. If he were a secretor of type A, type B, or type AB, he would have left antigens behind.
If the vaginal material matches the ABO group of the suspect, he cannot be eliminated, but neither can he be convicted. For example, if the victim is type A and the vaginal sample shows only type A and the suspect is a type A secretor, he cannot be eliminated from the suspect list. He could be the perpetrator, but so could anyone who is a type A or type O or a non-secretor. In the case of a type A suspect, the type A antigens found in the vaginal swabs could come from both him and the victim, while in the case of a type O secretor or a non-secretor, all of the type A antigens would have come from the victim.
Thus, secretor antigen matching is similar to blood typing. It can eliminate someone but cannot conclusively identify him as the assailant. It is too crude a test. DNA testing must be employed to make a conclusive match (see Chapter Ten).
Time Since Intercourse 
The timing of sexual intercourse or rape is often critical in forensics and courtroom proceedings. An accurate determination can implicate or exonerate a suspect. But, can the time lapse since intercourse be accurately determined? The short answer is not often.
In living victims, the duration of sperm motility is from four to six hours. If motile sperm are found in vaginal swabs, the sexual act likely occurred less than six hours earlier. After that, the sperm die and begin to break down and fragment, and timing becomes a guessing game. First the tails are lost, leaving behind sperm heads, and then the heads and tails undergo fragmentation and destruction. The survival of sperm heads and sperm remnants in various body orifices is extremely variable, so that no accurate timeline can be established. In general, these remnants may remain in the vagina for up to six or seven days, the rectum for two to three days, and the mouth less than twenty-four hours. In cases of rape-homicide, sperm may remain in the vagina of the corpse for up to two weeks.
Elevated SAP levels can be found in the vagina for up to seventy-two hours.
Semen is a fairly resilient substance. Laundering and dry cleaning of stained clothing may or may not remove all traces of PSA and SAP, and traces of spermatozoa can sometimes be found on microscopic examination of the laundered material. If protected from extremes of temperature, harsh chemicals, and other unfavorable environmental conditions, dried semen stains may remain identifiable and usable for DNA analysis for many years.
So why is the timing of intercourse so important? Suppose a woman accuses a man she had been dating of rape. She goes to the police and states that he came to her house and forced her to have sex and that this happened just two hours earlier. She is taken for a rape exam and the man is detained for questioning. He states they last had sex two days earlier and that it was consensual. The woman confirms that encounter. If motile sperm are found, her story holds. If only heads and fragments are found, then questions are raised about her story, and his story is confirmed. Mostly.
What if he raped her but did not ejaculate or used a condom? There would be no fresh sperm, only that left from two days earlier. Rape or no rape? Unfortunately, forensic science can’t resolve this. Only a judge and jury can.
VAGINAL FLUIDS 
The detection of vaginal fluids is difficult but may be important in non-ejaculatory rapes and penetrations with foreign objects. Swabs can be taken from the suspect’s penis or from any suspected foreign object. Testing depends on the finding of glycogen-containing epithelial cells. Epithelial cells line the vagina and glycogen is a starch that is stored within the cell.
Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) reagent stains glycogen a bright magenta color. If epithelial cells rich in glycogen are exposed to PAS, their cytoplasm (the liquid part of the cell) will show the magenta staining. In cases of object rape, the object used is swabbed and any material obtained is spread onto a glass slide. It is then stained with PAS and viewed under a microscope. If cells with bright magenta staining are seen, the material obtained is likely vaginal fluid.
The problem with this test is that even if vaginal fluid is present, the test may be falsely negative. The reason for this is that not all vaginal epithelial cells contain glycogen. Cells from young girls before menarche contain none and those from post-menopausal women rarely do. Also, the amount of glycogen found in these cells varies with the stage of the woman’s menstrual cycle. This means that a positive test is very helpful but a negative one does not necessarily mean that vaginal fluids aren’t present.
SALIVA 
Saliva is an important bodily fluid to the forensic examiner. It may be recovered from everything from stamps to food to bite marks. It may reveal ABO antigens, and thus blood type in secretors and may yield enough DNA for profiling.
Saliva is a digestive fluid that begins to break down carbohydrates into simpler sugars as a person chews food. Amylase is the enzyme that accomplishes this task. As with the acid phosphotase class of enzymes, amylase enzymes are found in many animals and plants.
Testing for saliva involves testing for the presence of alpha-amylase, the primary amylase found in saliva. There is no confirmatory test for saliva, only presumptive ones. The two most common use iodine and the Phadebas reagent.
Starch-Iodine Test 
The starch-iodine test has been used for over one hundred years, but is rarely used today. It is simple and easy to do and depends upon two facts: iodine will turn a starch (carbohydrate) blue and alpha-amylase breaks down a starch.
Testing is done with an agar gel plate that contains a starch. Several wells are cut into the gel and then iodine is poured over the plate. The Iodine reacts with the starch in the gel and turns it blue. The suspect sample is then placed into one of the wells. If amylase is present, it gradually breaks down the starch as it diffuses through the gel, causing the blue color to fade in a circular pattern around the well. Unfortunately, this test is neither sensitive nor specific. It does not detect low concentrations of amylase, and since amylase is found in other body fluids, a positive reaction does not absolutely indicate the presence of saliva.
Phadebas Reagent 
Phadebas reagent is an insoluble complex composed of a starch bound to a dye molecule. The complex is not soluble, so when it is placed in a liquid it does not dissolve and does not impart any color to the liquid. But amylase breaks down the complex and releases the dye, which is soluble and adds color to the liquid. The more amylase that is present, the more dye that is released, and the darker the liquid medium becomes. The degree of color change is measured by a spectrophotometer, which is an instrument that accurately measures color changes in liquids. The greater the color change, the higher the concentration of amylase in the sample and the more likely that it is saliva. 
