---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0015.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["print", "fingerprint", "used", "use", "detective", "ridge", "investigator", "two", "fingerprinting", "finger", "system", "surface", "powder", "one", "also", "police", "tape", "crime", "time", "identification", "suspect", "brush", "technician", "iafis", "ninhydrin"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0015html

---


8
8FINGERPRINTINGIt's a challenge to write crime scene investigation that's authentic; it's harder still to make it believable when everyone's become an “expert” watching the folks on TV get it wrong.— HALLIE EPHRON, AUTHOR OF WRITING AND SELLING YOUR MYSTERY NOVEL: HOW TO KNOCK 'EM DEAD WITH STYLEFingerprinting is a valuable tool for law enforcement because no two people in the world have identical prints. Even though identical twins have identical DNA, they have markedly different fingerprints. The basics of fingerprinting are taught to all police officers, but a fingerprint technician practices her craft daily. It takes a delicate touch and a keen eye to be the best, and a good fingerprint technician can sometimes make or break a criminal case.A BRIEF HISTORY OF FINGERPRINTINGThe ridges that cover the surface of fingertips and palms first caught the eye of University of Bologna professor Marcello Malpighi in the late 1600s. The worth of those looping crests was of no importance to him at the time, however, so he conducted no further research, and more than one hundred years passed before the subject of finger ridge patterns was addressed.In the mid-1800s, Sir William James Herschel served as a British chief administrative officer in Bengal, India. His method of fingerprinting for the purpose of invoking honesty among the Indian natives would eventually spark the idea of using fingerprints for the purpose of identification. Herschel thought that requiring someone to place a fingerprint beside his signature would reduce a person's inclination for deceitfulness because of the intimacy associated with touching the paper.Three years after Herschel began his quest to standardize a fingerprint honor system, Dr. Henry Faulds of Tokyo, Japan, realized the importance of using fingerprints not only for identification purposes but as a means of solving crimes. He also introduced the use of printer's ink as an excellent medium for transferring prints from fingers to paper.The late 1800s was a busy time for those who studied fingerprinting. Mark Twain wrote of identifying a murderer by his fingerprints, and Charles Darwin's cousin, Sir Francis Galton, wrote the book Finger Prints in 1892. Also in 1892, Argentina claimed the first use of a fingerprint to identify a murderer. In 1893, Twain's Pudd'nhead Wilson thrilled readers with its accounts of murder, court trials, and the use of fingerprint identification.England and Wales began the first fingerprinting for criminal identification in the early 1900s. Shortly afterward, the New York Civil Service Commission adopted the fingerprinting process as a means of identification for job applicants.Around the same time, the New York state prison system began using fingerprints for the identification of criminals, and they officially adopted the first fingerprint system in 1903. A year later, the U.S. penitentiary at Leaven-worth, Kansas, established its own fingerprint bureau. The penitentiary in Leavenworth also began to exchange fingerprint information with other law enforcement agencies and police officers.Prior to 1903, the Leavenworth prison used an identification system designed by French anthropologist Alphonse Bertillon. Bertillon's system measured the bony parts of the body, inserted the measurements into a formula and calculated the results, which supposedly applied only to one person.Bertillon's method was used for approximately thirty years before encountering its first major problem. A man named Will West was arrested and sentenced to serve time at the federal penitentiary at Leavenworth. When officials completed the measurements of West's personal identification features, they discovered that those measurements were almost identical to another man, William West, who was already serving time at Leavenworth.Officials compared photographs of the two men and were astounded to see that they could be mistaken for identical twins even though they weren't related. Prison employees took fingerprint samples from each of the men and compared them — they were different. After this discovery, fingerprinting became the official means for the identification of prisoners.Within twelve months of the Leavenworth fiasco, the U.S. Army began using an official fingerprint system for identification purposes. The U.S. Navy followed suit and, in as many months, was followed by the U.S. Marine Corps in adopting the system.MODERN-DAY FINGERPRINTING METHODS AND USESFingerprint technology has come a long way since the days when detectives had to wait months for laboratories to return fingerprint comparisons from crime scenes. It wasn't unheard of for fingerprint comparisons to arrive after criminals had been arrested, tried, and convicted based on evidence other than their fingerprints.Sometimes, criminals had actually served their time in jail when detectives received a positive match from the labs. It was a very slow and tedious process to examine individual fingerprints and then compare them to hundreds of possible suspects.Today, fingerprinting has moved into the world of computer technology. With the 1999 inception of the Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS), prints can be compared to a database of thousands of fingerprints in mere seconds. Now, it's possible for investigators to learn the identity of a criminal suspect on the same night he committed a crime, possibly preventing him from continuing a potentially dangerous crime spree.FINGERPRINT PATTERNSHuman fingertips are covered with convoluted ridges and grooves. The raised ridges are called friction ridges and are formed prior to birth. Fingerprints consist of two layers: The top layer is called the stratum corneum and the lower layer is called the stratum mucosum. Fingerprints are permanent, and slight injuries and cuts won't deface the pattern. However, a serious wound that damages the stratum mucosum can leave a permanent scar that alters a fingerprint. Each fingerprint is composed of several identifiable characteristics that make fingerprints unique to each individual.Television and movies sometimes suggest that criminals can conceal their identities by sanding or burning away their fingerprints with sandpaper or acid. Not so. Sanded fingertips still reveal the original print patterns, and permanently burned or disfigured prints become the suspect's permanent finger-prints, which are still unique to that person. The vast majority of burned or scarred fingertips still exhibit some or all of the original print patterns.The identifiable characteristics of fingerprint patterns are:Delta: the point on a ridge that's on or is nearest to the point of divergence of two lines.Divergence: the point where two parallel lines begin to separate.Core: the center or approximate center of a fingerprint pattern.Comparison: matching the similarities and differences of the ridge patterns of two fingerprint patterns.Bifurcation: a forking or dividing of one line (ridges or grooves) into two individual lines, which appears like a fork in a roadway.Common: a ridge that runs in a continuous line with no breaks.“T” junction: the point where a ridge ends at another ridge that runs at an angle to the first ridge, forming a “T” intersection.Dot: a tiny ridge that looks like a small dot or period.Row of dots: a continuous line of two or more dots.Trifurcation: occurs when a ridge divides into three separate ridges.PLAIN ARCH
The ridge enters on one side of the finger, rises gently in the center, and falls gradually as it reaches the other side of the finger.TENTED ARCH
One ridge rises upward, bisecting other arches.LOOP
A pattern formed by recurving ridges.WHORL
Two deltas with a recurve in front of each of the deltas.COMPOSITE
Consists of two or more patterns.ACCIDENTAL
Two deltas with one recurving ridge and one up-thrusting ridge.CENTRAL POCKET LOOP
Consists of one recurving ridge with two deltas that have no recurving ridges within the center of the patternThere are three major types of fingerprint patterns — arches, loops, and whorls. Each of those categories can be subdivided into even more distinguishable categories, such as tented arches, double loops, and accidental whorls.LATENT, PATENT, AND IMPRESSED PRINTSLatent prints, the prints most often mentioned by police officers or crime scene investigators, are prints that are accidentally or unintentionally left at a scene or on an object. Normally invisible to the naked eye, latent prints are made by someone touching an object and leaving behind natural body secretions like oils and sweat. Latent prints become visible when contacted by fingerprint powders.Patent prints are made when a person touches a surface with a bloody or greasy finger; these prints are readily visible. A third type of prints — impressed prints — are formed when a person touches a moldable material, such as clay, caulking, drying blood, or paint.DEVELOPING AND LIFTING LATENT PRINTSAll police officers are trained in fingerprinting. Some departments employ crime scene investigators whose main duty is fingerprinting. However, most small police departments don't have the luxury of specialized crime scene units; therefore, fingerprinting may be performed by the uniformed officer who first answered the call. In most cases a detective performs the fingerprinting duties.The ideal method for protecting print evidence is for the investigator to seize the entire object containing the suspect's prints, place the object in appropriate packaging, and deliver it to a testing facility. This method eliminates the possibility of destroying good evidence. Unfortunately, it isn't always possible to physically deliver large, heavy, and bulky objects, such as a refrigerator or built-in range, to a laboratory, so the technician must dust for and lift the prints from those items in the field.Technicians use a combination of gentle brushing and swirling motions to develop latent prints.In the best possible scenario, investigators could fingerprint every single surface and object in a crime scene. Unfortunately, to do so would be highly impractical. The practice could produce hundreds of prints left by anyone from the TV repairman to former owners of the property. Instead, investigators normally process items in the immediate area of the crime scene and use their common sense and intuition regarding other items in other areas. For example, a murder victim may have been found stabbed to death in the bedroom, but investigators may fingerprint items in the kitchen if they noticed a butcher knife missing from a knife block on the kitchen counter. Good old-fashioned common sense is a large part of police work.Investigators find it helpful to take photographs of all developed prints before lifting them in case something happens during the lifting process to alter or destroy a print. Lifting tape, which is similar to wide transparent tape, can form an air bubble beneath the surface that doesn't allow the entire print to be lifted. The tape can also slide, and the technician can accidentally touch the print. If the printing is taking place outdoors, weather can become a factor. Rain can erase an impressed print entirely.All these problems can result in a distorted or destroyed print. Photographs of fingerprints can be used for comparison at the testing labs. They can also be enlarged for enhancement purposes. Photographed prints can be entered in the IAFIS system just as easily as the actual print.Brushing fingerprint powder on a surface in an attempt to develop a visible fingerprint is sometimes called dusting for prints. There are a few ways to dust. The first method comes into play when investigators discover a suspect's prints already in dust or dirt, such as on a windowsill or furniture that hasn't been cleaned for a while. The investigator should photograph these prints prior to lifting them, and she shouldn't use any additional powders to assist in the developing.There are various assortments of print powders available. The basic colors are white, for use on dark surfaces, and black, for use on light-colored surfaces. Some technicians also use a mixture of approximately 60 percent black and 40 percent white for use on surfaces where neither of the two standard colors is effective, such as on stainless steel. In most cases, one of the three will do nicely.Some multicolored surfaces require a fluorescent powder, and a technician must use an ultraviolet light source, such as the Krimesite Imager, to see the developed print. Other items such as biological fibers and trace evidence also become visible when exposed to this type of equipment, which uses an alternative light source similar to a black light and is capable of capturing digital images of fingerprints that are difficult to lift by traditional means. A well-prepared detective or crime scene investigator would carry an alternate light source or a Krimesite Imager in their vehicle at all times.Fingerprinting brushes are normally made from fiberglass, camel hair, squirrel hair, or — as most technicians prefer for larger surfaces — marabou feathers. Marabou feather brushes are made from the feathers of the African marabou, the largest bird in the stork family. Camel hair brushes aren't actually made from the hair of camels; they're fashioned from a combination of hair from squirrels, ponies, sheep, goats, and other animals.When not in use, fingerprinting brushes are stored in small plastic tubes to protect the hairs and feathers from becoming frayed or bent. Feather brushes should be used for one color only because they retain powder; other types of brushes can be readily used for multiple powder colors. A simple shake or twirling action will remove excess powder to prepare the brush for use with another color. Most investigators prefer to use separate brushes for each color powder to avoid cross-contamination of conflicting colors. Also, detectives and investigators normally have a favorite type of brush and powder that they prefer to use for individual or unique situations.A detective begins developing a print by using a small amount of dusting powder on the tip of a fingerprinting brush. He shakes off any excess powder before applying the brush to the area he's to print. A very light, delicate touch must be used to develop a latent print. Investigators alternate techniques between brushing and swirling motions. The procedure requires practice to be performed properly and effectively.Marabou feather fingerprinting brush.A basic fingerprinting kit contains brushes, powders, tape, backing cards, and hinged lifters.To lift the print, the detective uses either hinged lifters — factory prejoined pieces of lifting tape and backing — or lifting tape that resembles a wide roll of packing tape. The detective places the tape, or the taped portion of the hinged lifter, over the dusted print and then rubs the tape gently to smooth out all wrinkles and tiny air bubbles. He then grasps one corner of the tape and peels it away from the printed surface. The print should be perfectly preserved on the sticky side of the tape. The detective then carefully places the tape on a firm surface, such as an index card, for preservation. The card serves as a backing and as a place to record notes about the print, such as the date, time, and location from where the print was lifted. In the case of hinged lifters, the backing is already attached so the detective needs only to stick the two pieces together. He can record all necessary information on the rear of the backing or at the top of the lifter.Prints are difficult to lift with tape from some surfaces, such as paper, but they can be easily lifted with chemicals. One such chemical is ninhydrin, a ready-made chemical available to law enforcement through police supply houses. It can be found in ready-made aerosol form or as a crystalline powder that's ready for mixing. For less than twenty dollars, detectives can purchase a sixteen-ounce aerosol can of ninhydrin. Twenty-five dollars will get detectives a jar of ninhydrin crystals, which will last much longer than the aerosol spray.In either form, ninhydrin is easily applied, but it's also very harmful to the human body. Ninhydrin is an amino-acid reagent and, therefore, adheres easily to the body surfaces and eyes of anyone in the presence of the spray. Fumes may also be inhaled. All persons present when ninhydrin is being used should wear protective gear.Standard latex gloves can allow seepage of some chemicals, so detectives should wear nitrile gloves in combination with goggles, breathing masks, and a protective outer garment, such as coveralls or a lab coat.To develop prints with ninhydrin, the detective either sprays or paints on the chemical, or dips the paper into it. She then exposes the paper to moist heat. One way to do this is to hold the paper near a hot steam iron. The purplish-tinted print develops in front of the detective's eyes.Some detectives prefer to mix and use their own solutions of ninhydrin. The mixing formula is simple: twenty-five grams of crystalline ninhydrin per four liters of solvent (acetone or methyl alcohol).A ninhydrin-developed print fades over time, so it's always a good idea to photograph the developed print and place the original into a sealed plastic bag. The bag will increase the longevity of the print. Ninhydrin has been used effectively to develop two-year-old fingerprints and, in some experimental cases, to develop prints that were fifty years old.Chemical print developing has other drawbacks — the chemicals can alter or even destroy other types of evidence, such as handwriting and ink from a printed document. The solvents used for mixing with ninhydrin can actually cause ink to run or dissolve. All documents should be copied before they're tested for fingerprints.When all else fails, detectives have another trick up their sleeves — cyano-acrylate fuming. Cyanoacrylate is an instant adhesive better known as Super Glue and Krazy Glue. It's used by physicians to seal wounds and by funeral directors to permanently close eyelids and lips, and to hold fingers together.Cyanoacrylate can be a very effective tool in developing hard-to-get finger-prints on nonporous materials. The investigator positions the object in question into a specially designed fuming chamber, such as the CyanoSafe. The CyanoSafe fuming chamber heats the cyanoacrylate to the proper temperature, allowing the release of the necessary fumes. The chamber automatically filters exhaust fumes and monitors the exhaust process. Sensors activate humidity controls, and the chamber features a glass front to let investigators visually monitor the print development process.CyanoSafe, a cyanoacrylate fuming chamber.The investigator squirts a dab of the glue into a round metal cup and then places the cup atop a small hot plate inside the fuming chamber. The heat from the hot plate causes the glue to produce fumes that react with the amino acids, fatty acids, and proteins contained on latent finger-prints. This chemical reaction forms a sticky substance along the ridges of the latent finger-print, making the print visible to the naked eye. The drawback to the cyanoacrylate method is that, as with nin-hydrin, the print fades over time and doesn't leave a permanent record; therefore, the print must be photographed. Although a photograph is never as good as the actual evidence, it's still enough for a conviction.A CyanoSafe can cost nearly ten thousand dollars, so it's not usually found in smaller police departments. Detectives in those departments often fabricate their own versions of the chamber, sometimes out of aquariums with tightly fitting tops and a portable hot plate. Portable, disposable fuming chambers are also available.Other specialty items or powders used by the police for the development of fingerprints are:Hungarian Red: used for staining print impressions found in blood. The prints show up under a green alternate light source. Gel lifters are used to lift the developed prints.Basic Yellow: a fluorescent dye used to enhance cyanoacrylate prints. These prints fluoresce under ultraviolet light.Iodine crystals: sold in prescored ampoules, these crystals are used for the development of prints on paper and some porous materials. They're not used for metals.Fluorescent powders: used on multicolored backgrounds.Rhodamine 6G: used for the enhancement of cyanoacrylate-developed prints.Aqueous Leucocrystal Violet: a highly sensitive testing compound that detects the presence of blood.Crystal Violet: a dye used to enhance sebaceous sweat residue in latent prints.Silver nitrate: used for the development of latent prints on porous surfaces. It won't dilute or cause inks to run.FINGERPRINT ANALYSISInvestigators spend sixteen hours in training classes learning to use the IAFIS system, forty hours learning to properly classify fingerprints, and an additional forty hours becoming certified in fingerprint comparison techniques.The IAFIS system is online 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. In the days before IAFIS became available to all law enforcement agencies (that can afford it), submitting a hard copy of a print to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) for possible suspect identification was a long and drawn-out process. It could take months before the submitting agency received a response. IAFIS now makes it possible to submit a print and receive a confirmation (a “hit”) in a matter of minutes. Some responses have been received as soon as ten minutes after the technician hit the “send” button on the IAFIS computer terminal.Response time for IAFIS can be slower depending on the day of the week the request is sent. Mondays offer the slowest response times due to the normally high volume of fingerprint evidence submissions gathered from week end crimes. The time of day is also a factor. Nighttime submissions receive quicker responses than daytime requests. In short, the more people using the system, the slower it operates.A fingerprint comparator.Television rarely gets the fingerprint process exactly correct. TV detectives send a print over the wires and instantly receive the name, address, phone number, social security number, and shoe size of their suspect. IAFIS is fast and very accurate, but it's not quite that fast; in fact, it doesn't deliver a perfect match to a suspect's prints. It sends a list of the best and most probable matches on file. From that list, detectives must examine, by hand, each of those prints and compare them to the fingerprints of the suspects.Before fingerprint technology received a boost from computers, detectives had to painstakingly scrutinize each print with a magnifying glass and a tiny metal pointer. Today, Cogent LiveScan, a computer linked to IAFIS, is a favorite tool of many law enforcement agencies. The 250-pound machine is a hefty piece of equipment standing over five and a half feet tall, two and a half feet wide, and nearly three feet deep. It has its own thermostatically controlled, self-contained cooling system and is built to withstand the abuse that combative suspects often deliver to police equipment.LiveScan has the ability to capture and transmit flat and rolled prints, as well as a suspect's palm prints. In most areas, the terminal is set up to instantly send images from a police department to the state bureau of investigation and the FBI.Some departments even have their own intradepartmental fingerprint computer, such as the Live-ID system employed by the Hamilton, Ohio, Police Department. The in-house system stores the fingerprints of local offenders and can be quite useful when officers arrest someone who refuses to tell them his name. If the person has ever been arrested by the department, a quick scan by the system will provide officers all the details about him. Jails also use the system to prevent the release of the wrong person. A person's fingerprints must match the fingerprints in her file before she can be released.Fingerprint technicians and detectives who have the painstaking task of comparing fingerprints use fingerprint comparators to help them. A finger-print comparator is designed to illuminate and project images to two side-by-side viewing screens. These machines have zoom capability and are also used for the comparison of counterfeit currency and handwriting samples.ROLLED PRINTSRolled prints are taken from fingers of actual humans, such as after an arrest or during an autopsy. Each suspect who's been arrested must submit a copy of his fingerprints during the booking process. If the arrest is for a misdemeanor, the print cards remain with the arresting agency. In the case of a felony arrest, a suspect is required to submit two sets of her prints. One set is sent to the FBI for entry into IAFIS (the FBI has been maintaining an official database of fingerprint records since July 1, 1921). The other set is kept and filed by the arresting agency. Departments equipped with computerized fingerprint terminals have all but eliminated the use of manually rolled fingerprint cards.To obtain a rolled print, a technician or officer grasps a subject's finger, presses it against an inked pad, and rolls the first joint of the finger from side to side on a fingerprint card. The ink isn't permanent and can be quite messy, so most police departments keep a jug of hand cleaner and a roll of paper tolls on hand to allow suspects and officers to clean their hands after the printing process is complete.Fingerprinting the dead isn't always an easy task. Fingers of the deceased can be badly damaged, decomposed, dry, and brittle. Investigators sometimes have to employ the use of special techniques to assist them with fingerprinting a corpse.The hands of the dead are often found with clenched fingers. Finger-straightening tools — zinc-coated steel strips that fit over the fingers — are used to straighten the fingers by force. Tissue builders and finger softeners are used to return the flesh to a more pliable state.When all else fails, technicians use bone cutters to remove the fingers. Some investigators have even skinned the fingers and placed the skin over their own fingertips to complete the printing process.Rolled prints are often taken from the hands of children and kept on file to be used in the event the child becomes missing or is kidnapped. Rolled prints are used for identification purposes and are usually entered into IAFIS.Rolled print card.
