---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_024.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["blood", "spatter", "pattern", "victim", "stain", "scene", "would", "drop", "bloodstain", "body", "floor", "impact", "crime", "point", "angle", "found", "object", "surface", "sheppard", "blow", "may", "source", "figure", "attack", "might"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit024html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 13 
BLOODSTAINS: 
PATTERNS TELL THE STORY  
Violent crimes, suicides, and accidents often involve the shedding of blood, and the resulting bloodstains can be the key to determining exactly what happened and in what sequence. In cases of criminal activity, these stains are often key to the crime’s solution. The analysis of bloodstain patterns is partly science, but mostly art. Science tells us how blood behaves, but understanding the messages hidden within its patterns requires knowledge, experience, and common sense.
From a forensic point of view, blood provides the ME and the crime lab with a wealth of information. The analysis of blood can be divided along biological and physical lines. The analyses in Chapter Nine dealt with blood as a biological fluid, and in this chapter we’ll deal with its physical properties— those it shares with other liquids. The bloodstain pattern at the crime scene can be used to determine the cause and manner of death and to reconstruct the crime scene.
BLOODSTAIN PATTERNS  
It is unknown exactly when bloodstain patterns were first used in criminal investigation, but it was mentioned in an English court proceeding as early as 1514. In 1895, the first published work on bloodstain pattern recognition appeared. Authored by Polish scientist Dr. Eduard Piotrowski, it cataloged the results of his extensive studies of bloodstains. In 1939, Sorbonne forensic scientist Victor Balthazard (1872–1950) published his considerable work on blood patterns. The famous case of State of Ohio v. Samuel Sheppard was seminal in the use of bloodstains in U.S. courtrooms.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE SAM SHEPPARD CASE 
This famous case of Dr. Samuel Sheppard inspired the popular television series and movie The Fugitive. The real case began on the night of July 4, 1954, when Dr. Sheppard’s wife, Marilyn, was brutally murdered in her home. Dr. Sheppard said an intruder attacked and bludgeoned his wife to death, while he attempted to protect her but was knocked unconscious. When he awoke, he examined his wife for signs of life, including checking her pulse in her neck, and then called for help.
The home appeared to have been ransacked as if the attacks were part of a home invasion robbery. But police found inconsistencies in the crime scene bloodstain pattern.
Sheppard had no blood on his hands, body, or clothing. Such stains would be expected had he been the one to bludgeon his wife; their absence would seem to exonerate Sheppard. But this complete lack of blood on Sheppard and his clothing raised many questions. Because of the brutal nature of the attack, the killer would have been covered with blood and some of that blood should have been transferred to Sheppard during their struggle. In addition, Sheppard had no blood on his hands, which would be likely if he had checked for a pulse in his wife’s blood-covered neck.
Sheppard said that his watch, wallet, ring, and keys were missing. He believed that the killer must have taken them and, indeed, the police found a green bag with the missing items not far from the house. Again, the bag and wallet had no blood on them as would be expected if the killer handled them with his bloody hands. And wouldn’t Sheppard’s pants, wrists, and hand have blood transfers as the killer removed Sheppard’s wallet, keys, watch, and rings? No such stains were found, which meant that whoever took those items and placed them into the bag did so with clean hands.
However, several fine blood spatters were found on the face of Sheppard’s watch. These spatters were produced by flying blood droplets and would indicate that the watch had been near the victim at the time she was struck. Had they came from contact with the victim’s neck as Sheppard felt for a pulse, the stains would have been in the form of transfer smears and not spatter droplets.
Police determined that most likely Sheppard bludgeoned his wife to death, cleaned the blood from his hands and body, trashed the house to make it look as though a burglary had occurred, and placed his watch and the other items in the green bag and tossed the bag where police would find it. The spatters on his watch went unnoticed. Based on the blood, or lack of blood, as well as other evidence, Sheppard was convicted of murder. The case didn’t end there, and over the decades the family of Dr. Sheppard have returned to court to clear the doctor’s name in what is viewed by many to be a wrongful conviction. Dr. Sheppard was posthumously declared innocent, but his story remains controversial to this day.
Blood is frequently found at crime scenes that involve violent bodily injury. An analysis of the bloodstain patterns might allow the ME to determine:
• the origin of the bloodstains 
• the type of weapon used 
• the direction from which an object struck the victim 
• the relative positions of the victim and the assailant or assailants 
• the locations and movements of the victim and assailant during the attack 
• the number of blows or gunshots delivered to the victim 
• the truthfulness of any suspects and witnesses  
CHARACTERISTICS OF BLOOD  
Blood is a complex substance, consisting of both liquid (plasma) and solid (cellular) components. As a liquid, it shares many physical properties with other liquids in that it moves and flows as gravity dictates and tends to pool in low-lying areas. It spreads to cover a surface or to conform to the shape of any container. It possesses viscosity, a measure of its thickness, and surface tension properties. Surface tension is an elastic-like property that results from the attraction of a liquid’s molecules for each other. It is the force that holds a liquid together and that pulls a falling drop into a spherical shape.
However, unlike water and most other liquids, blood possesses biological properties. It is more viscous (thicker) than water, and of course it clots. Within its liquid plasma are cellular elements such as red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets, and various proteins, many of which are involved in the clotting process. When blood clots, it separates into a solid dark-red clot and clear yellow liquid called serum.
Plasma and serum are often used interchangeably, but they are quite different even though they appear similar to the naked eye. Plasma is the liquid portion of whole, unclotted blood. It contains the proteins that are involved in the clotting process as well as other protein materials. It can be separated from whole blood in a centrifuge, a device that rapidly spins a test tube of blood, causing the cells to settle in the bottom, leaving the plasma on top. Serum is the liquid remaining after the blood has clotted and retracted into a clump. It is devoid of the clotting proteins since they have been consumed in the clotting process.
Blood will remain a liquid as long as it’s inside the body’s vascular system and is moving. At death, the heart stops and the blood stagnates and clots. Also, when blood leaves the body, it will clot in just a few minutes.
SHEDDING BLOOD  
Blood is shed from the body in several ways. It can drip, ooze, flow, gush, or spurt, and each of these leaves a distinctive bloodstain pattern. If unchecked, any continuous blood loss can lead to death from exsanguination (bleeding to death).
As blood flows from the body, it begins to pool and clot. Normal clotting time for blood is from three to fifteen minutes. This is extremely individual and may be affected by certain diseases, such as hemophilia and some types of leukemia, as well as various medications, like heparin and Coumadin. When blood begins to clot, it first forms a dark, shiny, jelly-like mass. With time, the clot begins to contract and separate from the yellowish serum. Investigators can use this as a rough guide to estimate the time lag since the blood left the victim’s body. If still liquid, the bleeding occurred only a few minutes before. If it is a shiny and gelatinous pool, the bleeding likely occurred more than thirty minutes earlier, and if separated into clot and serum, it is probable that several hours have passed.
Corpses do not bleed. At death, the heart stops, the blood ceases to circulate, and bleeding stops. Within minutes, the blood begins to clot within the vessels and tissues of the body. This means that any bloodstains that resulted from spurting or gushing of blood must have occurred before death. Impact spatters and splashes may occur after death, but only through the actions of the assailant, such as if he continues striking the victim or steps in a pool of blood.
The mechanisms by which blood leaves the body can be divided into two categories: passive and projected. Passive mechanisms depend upon the action of gravity alone and include oozes and drips. Projected blood results when some force other than gravity is applied. Arterial spurts, castoff blood, and impact spatter are examples. Each of these types of blood loss creates a unique stain pattern. These are called bloodstain patterns or blood spatters.
PASSIVE BLOODSTAIN PATTERNS 
Passive stains are the result of the effects of gravity. That is, the blood is not ejected or forced from the body by some other force, but rather moves passively under the influence of the force of gravity. Blood that oozes or drips from the body will “move downhill” and will tend to collect in the lowest areas near the injured or deceased person. This could be a floor drain or a low corner of the room. Stairs, ramps, or any steeply angled floor may carry the blood a considerable distance before it clots. Gushing or fast-flowing blood will gather in larger amounts and is capable of traveling further from the body than oozing blood. A slow ooze will clot before moving too far from the body.
Blood may drip from an injured person’s wounds, a blood-covered weapon, the assailant’s hands, a tabletop, or any elevated object that is coated with blood. If a person is shot or stabbed in the shoulder, blood might run down his arm and drip from his fingers. The assailant who is carrying a bloody knife or bludgeon likely drips blood in his wake. Blood on a bed or tabletop might ooze over the edge and fall to the floor.
Typically, a drop is formed when a small amount of blood breaks away from a larger blood source. Because of the surface tension of the drop, it will be spherical and remain so until it strikes some surface or until it is itself struck by another object. Drops do not break apart into smaller drops simply by falling through the air. If the drop strikes a table edge or is struck by a swinging arm or weapon, it will break apart. But if unmolested, it will fall as a sphere until it reaches the floor or some other surface.
When a falling blood drop strikes a flat surface it splashes in all directions, creating a circle of spatter around the point of impact. The diameter and shape of this spatter pattern depends on the size and speed of the drop, the angle of impact, and the nature of the surface it strikes.
Figure 13-1: Vertical blood drop. The diameter of the bloodstain produced by a drop of blood falling vertically onto a smooth surface increases with the distance traveled: 1 foot (A), 4 feet (B), or 7 feet (C). 
Figure 13-2: Angled blood drop. The shape of the stain pattern depends on the angle of impact. The circular pattern seen in a 90-degree approach angle (A) progressively elongates as the angle becomes more acute, as is seen in impact angles of 45 degrees (B) and 10 degrees (C). 
A blood drop picks up speed as it falls until it reaches terminal velocity, its maximum free fall speed. The terminal velocity is approximately twenty-five feet per second and is only reached after a fall of twenty to twenty-five feet.
The spatter pattern of a drop of blood increases in size as the drop falls from an inch up to about seven feet, where it produces a circle of nearly an inch in diameter. Above that height, no significant increase in spatter diameter is seen. The size range for a single drop varies from approximately 13 mm to 22 mm, depending upon the distance traveled and the size of the drop (see Figure 13-1).
If a drop approaches at a right angle (90 degrees) to the surface, the spatter pattern will be a symmetric circle around the point of impact. If it strikes from a more acute angle, the spatter is an elongated elliptical pattern with the narrow or pointed end aiming in the direction of the drop’s travel (see Figure 13-2).
Using trigonometric functions, it is possible to calculate the angle of impact by measuring the dimensions of the stain (see Figure 13-3), a determination that is critical to the accurate reconstruction of the sequence of events at a violent crime scene. The formula uses the width (W) and length (L) of the stain and is:
Figure 13-3: Angle of impact calculation. A blood drop’s angle of impact can be calculated by measuring its width and length. 
Angle of impact = arc sin W/L  
An area of confusion results from what are called secondary or satellite spatters. If a large drop of blood falls onto a hard surface, small secondary droplets may surround the original circular stain. Since these have directionality, they are elongated. The confusion arises from the fact that the elongated “tails” of these satellite droplets tend to point toward the direction from which they came and not the direction they were traveling.
Figure 13-4: Target surface and spatter shape. The character of the struck surface alters the spatter pattern of a blood drop. A smooth surface (A) creates a small, round spatter while a rough surface (B) causes a very irregular spatter. 
The nature of the surface impacted will significantly alter the size and character of the spatter (see Figure 13-4). Hard, smooth surfaces, such as glass, glazed tile, or polished marble, create much smaller spatters than rough, irregular surfaces such as unfinished wood or concrete.
Earlier I said that the dead don’t bleed. That’s true under almost all circumstances, but there are situations where a body might continue to shed blood after death … for a few minutes anyway. This is called the perimortem period—the time around the time of death.
Take the example of someone killed by a throat slash. He falls dead fairly quickly and the heart stops in short order. But in this situation, the major arteries and veins of the neck, which hold a good deal of blood, have been sliced open. The force of gravity might cause the blood within the vessels to flow through these openings and exit the body. A victim who is lying on his side or face-down might continue to leak blood from these vessels until they are empty or until the blood clots. This can take several minutes so that a pool of blood might collect near the neck of the victim even after death has occurred.
PROJECTED BLOOD SPATTERS 
Projected blood spatters occur when an influence other than gravity acts on a blood source. This influence might be a naturally occurring internal force, such as the heartbeat or breathing of the victim, or it may be an external force such as a gunshot or blunt-force trauma. The disseminated bloodstains tend to vary in size and shape and can be produced by several different mechanisms, including stabbings, beatings, gunshots, arterial bleeding, expirated blood (blood from airways blown out of the nose or mouth), castoff blood, and splashing. A single stain is not a spatter, since a pattern of stains is required for spatter analysis.
A single gunshot may produce a spatter pattern, but a single blow with a blunt object (a baseball bat, board, or similar item) typically does not. A bullet that enters and exits the body damages tissue, causes immediate bleeding, and carries blood and tissue with it through the exit wound. This produces a characteristic spatter pattern on any object “downwind” from the exit point.
But with a victim who is repeatedly struck in the head, the first blow strikes only skin and hair, and thus does not cause a spattering of blood. It does, however, cause damage and bleeding so that the bloody scalp becomes a blood source. A blood source is any collection of blood, in this case on and within the scalp. Subsequent blows to the same area cause spattering of this collection of blood. So, the initial blow produces the blood source and subsequent blows produce the spattering.
Spatter patterns aid the ME in determining the blood source, the source’s location at the crime scene, and the mechanism that produced the spatters. This is critical since it can show the positions of the assailant and the victim at the time the attack occurred. This is accomplished by locating the point of convergence and the point of origin of the spatter. Finding the point of convergence (the location of the blood source) requires the use of simple plane geometry, while the locating the point of origin (the three-dimensional location of the blood source) employs three-dimensional solid geometry. It’s actually quite simple, so let’s look at how each of these points is located.
Figure 13-5: Point of convergence. Lines drawn through the long axis of each bloodstain intersect at the point of convergence, which indicates the location of the blood source. 
Just as we saw with blood drops, the individual droplets that make up the spatter strike nearby surfaces with varying angles of impact and directionality. The impact angle is the angle of approach relative to the surface struck, while the directionality is the direction from which it approached.
The directionality of each stain is used to locate the point of convergence (see Figure 13-5). It is a two-dimensional location that is determined by the convergence of imaginary lines drawn through the long axis of two or more spatters.
At the crime scene, strings are stretched along the long axis of each stain. The strings intersect at the point of convergence. If the angle of impact of each stain is added to this measurement, the point of origin is revealed (see Figure 13-6). This is done by using a protractor to angle each of the imaginary lines or strings to correspond with each stain’s angle of impact. Today, laser lights are sometimes used instead of strings and computer programs are available to help with the calculations.
In the crime scene analyst’s report, he usually gives a range of possible points of origin of the blood source. For example, after analyzing spatter patterns on the floor, wall, and sofa at the scene of a violent attack, he may state that the point of origin was four to six feet from the wall, two to four feet from the sofa, and four to six feet above the floor. This would indicate that the victim of the blood-shedding trauma was standing near the wall and the sofa. If he found that the proximity to the wall and sofa were as above, but the distance to the floor was only one to two feet, then most likely the victim was lying on the floor when struck.
Figure 13-6: Point of origin. By using both directionality and angle of impact of each stain, the point of origin of the stains is revealed. 
A void pattern also helps with crime scene reconstruction. A void pattern is an absence of blood spatters in an area where the examiner would expect to see them. This might indicate where the attacker was standing. For example, if someone is severely beaten and blood spatters are found on the walls, floor, and furniture in every direction except to one side of the victim, it is likely that the attacker was standing at that position during the attack and intercepted the spattered blood. Here, the blood droplets would be on the attacker and not on the floor or other objects.
Similarly, if a spatter pattern is found on a suspect’s body or clothing, it means he was present at the scene at the time of the attack. Spattering of blood can only occur during the impacts that produce them, so if the suspect had spatters on his clothes, arms, or face, he must have been in close proximity to the victim at the time of the attack. Someone who came along after the attack and accidentally got blood on his clothing would not show a spatter pattern, but rather blotches or smears. These stains are called transfer patterns.
This information can help investigators confirm or refute a suspect’s statement, regarding whether he was at the scene during the attack. For example, let’s say a husband states that he came home and found his wife on the floor, beaten and bleeding, and tried to perform CPR. He explains that this was how he got blood on his hands and clothes. And indeed he could have smears and blotches of blood on his clothes and body from just such contact with his wife. But what if he also had spatter stains on his arms or pant legs? These could not be present unless he was near the victim at the time the blows were delivered. He would have a bit of explaining to do.
So, the analysis of blood spatter patterns can reveal the blood source and the source’s location at the crime scene. It can also provide clues as to the mechanism that produced the spatters.
SPATTER CLASSIFICATION  
Classifying spatter patterns helps determine what produced them. Was the blood shed as a result of a gunshot, a blow to the head, or a severed artery? There are two methods for classifying projected blood spatters: one using the mechanism by which the spatter was produced and the other by using the velocity with which the blood was shed. Using these, the ME or blood spatter expert can determine how the spatter was produced, and this in turn helps reconstruct the events of the crime and test the veracity of suspect and witness statements.
MECHANISM: IMPACT, PROJECTION, AND COMBINATION SPATTERS 
One classification system uses the mechanism that produced the stains, dividing them into three major types: impact, projection, or combination spatters.
Impact spatters typically occur with beatings, stabbings, gunshots, or any other circumstance where the victim is “impacted” by a foreign object. Projection spatters result from arterial bleeding, castoff blood, and expirated blood. Arterial bleeding occurs whenever an artery is torn, severed, or punctured and blood is pumped through the defect by the beating heart.
Castoff stains occur whenever a blood-soaked object, such as a bat or pipe, is swung. The swinging action “casts off” droplets of blood, which may be found on the floor, walls, ceiling, or any nearby object.
Expirated blood results when the victim’s lungs or airways contain blood and the victim is breathing. Each expiration sprays blood from the victim’s mouth and nose.
Often the spatters found at a crime scene are a combination of these. For example, a victim who is stabbed in the chest or neck may leave a combination of impact spatters from the force of the attack, castoff spatters from the arc of the knife, arterial projection spatters if a major artery is damaged, and expirated blood from the injured and bleeding lungs or trachea.
SPATTER VELOCITY: LOW, MEDIUM, AND HIGH 
The other spatter classification method categorizes spatters by the force with which the impacting object strikes and the resulting velocity of the blood as it leaves the blood source. This system divides spatters into low-, medium-, and high-velocity spatters.
Low-velocity spatters come from an object moving less than five feet per second. This results in larger spatters, which are typically 4 mm or greater in diameter. These types of spatters are produced by several mechanisms. Drops that fall under the influence of only gravity, such as blood dripping from a wound or a blood-soaked weapon, are common examples.
If the dripping source is standing still, the drops fall vertically and create circular stains. But, if the source is moving, such as a fleeing injured victim or an escaping assailant who is carrying a blood-covered weapon, the drops strike the floor at an angle, producing elongated stains with projections extending in the direction of movement. Such information is vital to the criminalist who is attempting to analyze the crime scene.
Let’s suppose that an assailant with blood on his hands stands near the body of his victim. He drips blood onto the floor, leaving a round bloodstain pattern for each drop. If he begins to move around in the house, the drops that fall no longer strike the floor from a vertical or 90-degree angle, since as he moves the drops leave his hands with a forward motion. The resulting stains are oval with the elongated tail pointing in the direction of travel. They would appear similar to the angled impacts shown in Figure 13-2. The criminalists can use this to determine the assailant’s movements within the crime scene and perhaps to determine his escape route. Following his trail may lead to a discarded murder weapon or other evidence.
Arterial bleeding is also considered low velocity. If an artery is damaged during an assault, suicide attempt, or accident, the blood loss may be in the form of gushes or spurts, depending on the size of the artery, the extent of the damage, and whether clothing or some other object covers the injury. A freely spurting artery results in a spatter pattern that is linear and cascading in nature (see Figure 13-7). Its distance from the wound, length, and volume declines steadily as the blood loss increases and the victim’s blood volume and blood pressure declines.
Figure 13-7: Arterial blood spatters. Arterial bleeding occurs in rhythmic spurts. If the blood strikes a vertical surface, it produces long, linear, or arcing stains that “bleed” downward under the influence of gravity. 
Another low-velocity blood source is castoff blood. This is blood that is cast off or flung from a bloody object due to centrifugal force. Castoff patterns result when a weapon is used to deliver a series of arcing blows, and thus are typically found on walls and ceilings. The resulting spatter pattern is a fairly uniform trail of droplets that reflect the arc of travel of the object (see Figure 13-8). Determining the point of convergence and the angle of impact of these castoff stains will reveal the assailant’s position at the time he swung the weapon. In some cases, it is possible to estimate the perpetrator’s height and even his handedness, or at least which hand struck the blows.
Figure 13-8: Castoff blood spatters. Blood cast off from a moving weapon typically forms a linear bloodstain pattern. 
In addition, the number of castoff patterns found will indicate the minimum number of blows to the victim. Because every swing of the weapon may not produce castoff stains, there may have been more blows delivered, but there can’t be fewer.
Medium-velocity spatters come from objects moving between five and one hundred feet per second. These spatters are typically smaller than stains from low-velocity droplets and vary from 1 to 4 mm in size. Mediumvelocity spatters come from impacts with blunt or sharp objects and from expirated blood.
Spatters from impacts with a blunt object are distributed in all directions in a radial pattern. As with low-velocity spatters, an analysis of directionality and impact angle of the stains can help locate the point of origin. And as mentioned before, a void pattern in the omnidirectional spray can indicate the position of the attacker.
If the wounds are to the face, throat, or lungs, blood mixes with the exhaled air, creating a fine spray and producing a mist spatter pattern. This misty pattern may be found on and around the victim as well as on the attacker. These spatters would indicate that the victim lived for a while after delivery of the fatal blows.
High-velocity spatters result when an object strikes at a speed above one hundred feet per second. The resulting spatters tend to be very small, usually less than 1 mm in diameter. They tend to appear as mist-like stains. Gunshots and high-speed machinery injuries usually produce this pattern.
A bullet, which moves at very high velocity, will of course produce a high-velocity spatter pattern. These patterns may be seen near either entrance or exit wounds, but they arise from different mechanisms. When associated with the entrance wound, it is called blowback or back spatter. In this situation, the direction of travel of the droplets is opposite to the path of the bullet. These types of spatters might be found on the shooter or the weapon, even inside the barrel of the gun in very close-range shots. If the misting is found near the exit wound, it is termed forward spatter, since the droplets follow the direction of the bullet. These are likely found on the wall, furniture, or any other object that is near the exit wound.
TRANSFER PATTERNS 
Another form of bloodstain pattern is a transfer pattern, which occurs when an object soaked with blood contacts an unstained object. Bloody fingerprints and footprints are commonly seen. If the perpetrator brushes against or kneels in a bloodstain or wipes the weapon or his hands on his shirt, he transfers the victim’s blood to his clothing. Matching the blood from such a transfer stain to the victim’s blood shows that the suspect and the victim were in contact with one another during or after the blood-shedding event.
As with finger and shoeprints, blood-soaked fabric can leave behind a recognizable pattern. Let’s say a perpetrator kneels on the floor next to his victim and unknowingly transfers blood to the knee of his pants. After his escape, he leans against his car door and transfers the stain, along with the weave pattern of his pants. This stain, coupled with DNA matching of the blood to the victim, could link the suspect to the crime scene and the victim.
BLOOD SPATTERS AND CRIME SCENE RECONSTRUCTION  
The ME uses passive, spatter, transfer, and void patterns to reconstruct the crime scene and to determine the sequence of events that led to the victim’s injury or death, which in turn might reveal whether a suspect or witness is being truthful about the circumstances of the crime.
Documenting bloodstain and spatter patterns is essential and must be done in a timely and logical fashion. Police, fire, and rescue personnel, as well as family, friends, and other unnecessary foot traffic, can alter or contaminate the blood evidence. For this reason, control of the scene must be immediate and consistent (see Chapter Two: Evidence, “The Crime Scene”). Indoor scenes, unless they are high-traffic public places, can usually be preserved long enough to obtain the needed information, while outdoor crime scenes, which are subject to environmental influences, and public places require more urgency.
Bloodstains are carefully photographed in an orderly sequence. The photographer initially captures an overall view of the scene and then gradually moves in on individual stains. The latter are photographed closely enough to reveal all needed detail and a ruler or other measuring device is included for scale.
In homicide cases, initial attention is given to the body and any associated bloodstains or spatters. After removal of the body, other spatters are addressed.
Bloodstain analysis might also indicate that the body was moved or that someone attempted to clean up the scene. Long smears might reveal the path of a dragged body and faint smears and streaks on a freshly cleaned floor could indicate an attempt to clean up the scene.
Some bloodstains may be latent (invisible to the naked eye). Luminol (see Chapter Nine: Serology) is frequently used to expose these hidden stains. Even in well-scrubbed scenes, luminol can often reveal bloody tracks and drag marks, which may indicate the perpetrator’s movements or escape route or whether the body was moved. It can also expose mop and wipe marks left behind by the attempted clean up.
After adequate photographs have been obtained, crime scene analysts begin to examine the stains for directionality and impact angle. The criminalists run a web of lines or employ laser lights to determine the points of convergence and origin. Once they complete their analysis, they create a report that includes the locations of the victim and the assailant at each stage of the attack, the number and type of injuries inflicted, and the exact sequence of events. Let’s look at a couple of examples of this art.
THE ART OF CRIME SCENE RECONSTRUCTION 
First we’ll return to the example of the husband who came home and found that his wife had been bludgeoned to death. He says that he checked to make sure she was dead, walked to the kitchen and called the police, and then waited on the porch for their arrival. A reasonable and believable sequence of events. But, what if the victim is stretched out on the living room floor and the amount of blood around the body seems meager in view of the violence of the attack? What if no spatter patterns are found on the floor, wall, or furniture near the body? Such evidence suggests that the victim had not been attacked where she lay. What if an examination of the kitchen revealed that the floors had been freshly cleaned? What if one leg of the husband’s pants showed a very fine spatter and several tiny drops of the victim’s blood were found on the carpet between the kitchen and the location of the body?
This evidence would refute the husband’s story in many ways and would elevate him to the top of the suspect list. The spatter analysis would suggest an entirely different scenario beginning with the fact that the victim was likely killed in the kitchen and moved to the living room, probably in an effort to deflect the investigator’s attention away from the true crime scene. The kitchen was then cleaned, but the drops on the carpet that fell while moving the body went unnoticed by the husband. Luminol might reveal drag stains where the body was moved, mop strokes where the kitchen floor was cleaned, and wipe marks from where he cleaned the cabinets or kitchen table. Even worse news for the husband is the spatter pattern on his pant leg, which would indicate that he had at least been present at the time of the attack.
Let’s look at a second example.
John comes home from work two hours early one day and finds that the back door to his house has been pried open. As he enters, he hears someone moving around upstairs, so he goes to his den where he keeps a handgun locked in a drawer. Taking the weapon, he climbs the stairs and enters his bedroom where he surprises a burglar, standing near a chest of drawers and rummaging through his wife’s jewelry case. The burglar charges him and John manages to get off a single shot, which hits the intruder in the upper arm. But the thief strikes John in the side of the head twice with a metal pipe. The gun falls to the floor and John retreats into the hallway, his attacker in pursuit. John heads toward the bathroom in the hopes of locking himself inside, but doesn’t make it. He is clubbed to the floor, rolls to his back, and attempts to defect the blows. He is struck in the head several times before he loses consciousness. The attacker strikes John three more times, killing him. He then returns to the bedroom, takes the jewelry box, rushes down stairs, and out the back door.
Using fingerprints and the AFIS system (see Chapter Twelve: Fingerprints, “The Automated Fingerprint Identification System”), the police quickly identify the perpetrator and arrest him at his home. He admits to the robbery but says that the killing was in self-defense. Will the blood spatter patterns at the scene expose his lie?
IN THE BEDROOM: The bullet that entered the thief’s arm would produce high-velocity spatter over the carpet, the chest of drawers, and perhaps the bed or any other nearby furniture. There would also be medium-velocity spatter on the floor and doorway from the blows to John’s head. DNA analysis could easily determine whose blood was where and firearms examination (see Chapter Sixteen: Firearms Examination) would reveal that the gun was the weapon that fired the bullet through the thief’s arm. Also, using gunshot residue techniques and perhaps fingerprints, it would be shown that indeed John had pulled the trigger. So far, the perpetrator’s story holds up.
IN THE HALLWAY: Blood drops from both men would be found on the hardwood floor of the hall and the shape of these drops would indicate that both were moving toward the bathroom at the end of the hall. Also, bloody shoeprints might help in this regard. Near the bathroom, blood spatter analysis would show that several blows were delivered to the now unarmed John and defensive wounds on his hands and arms would indicate that he defended himself. Spatters from the killing blows would cover the floor, wall, and the door leading into the bathroom. The point of origin of these spatters would indicate that John had been on the floor when the killing blows were delivered.
Based on the bloodstain evidence, the criminalist would be able to reconstruct the scene and determine the exact sequence of events. The fact that John was unarmed, on the floor, and in a defensive posture would refute the killer’s claim that he had killed John in self-defense. The perpetrator would not only face burglary charges but also perhaps murder charges. He could easily have fled with John injured and down, but he chose to continue his attack until he had killed him. 
