---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0017_split_001.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["body", "autopsy", "medical", "examiner", "death", "one", "technician", "victim", "coroner", "blood", "fluid", "police", "organ", "also", "time", "may", "place", "examination", "scene", "funeral", "sometimes", "room", "bag", "cause", "make"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0017split001html

---


10
AUTOPSYIf a medical examiner were allowed to do only one thing during an autopsy, that one thing should be to weigh the heart of the victim. The weight of a heart is the key to most of death's mysteries.— RICHARD BURKHARDT, M.D., CORONER, BUTLER COUNTY, OHIOAn autopsy is the postmortem examination performed on a body to determine the cause of death. The word autopsy means “to look for one's self,” and people have been doing just that — peering inside dead bodies — for a long, long time.The dissection of dead bodies can be traced to at least 3500 B.C. These early examinations were conducted, not for medicinal or forensic research, but for the purpose of predicting the future. Early people thought that internal organs, such as the liver and intestines, contained messages from spirits.The father of medicine, Hippocrates, theorized that illness was caused by a person's superstitious beliefs, by something the sick had done to displease the gods, or by dark and evil spirits possessing the ailing person. Hippocrates also believed that for a person to remain in good health, his four circulating humors (phlegm, blood, yellow bile, and black bile) must be in perfect balance.Those who practice traditional Chinese medicine still believe in the importance of balance between the four bodily humors. Traditional Chinese medicine places qi (air and breath), life's energy, as the foremost of the humors, followed by blood, vital essences, and fluid. Although these four humors differ a bit from those listed by Hippocrates, the Chinese also believe that any imbalance of the humors can cause a person to suffer extreme adverse effects and illness.Somewhere around 135 A.D. a young scholar and disciple of Hippocrates named Galen began his studies of medicine at the age of sixteen. Galen became a surgeon to the gladiators and believed that all those who studied medicine should learn anatomy through autopsy and dissection. Galen was the first person to discuss a four-chambered human heart, and he believed in a “balance treatment” of disease — if a person was cold, he prescribed giving him something hot; if he was wet, he prescribed drying him off.In the late 1200s, the University of Bologna's law faculty ordered autopsies to help solve legal troubles within the community. In the 1500s, autopsy became a standard practice in the studies of human pathology, even though it was a crime to dissect a human corpse. Grave robbing became commonplace among some medical students.Giovanni Battista Morgagni is considered one of the first great pathologists. His book The Seats and Causes of Diseases Investigated by Anatomy is considered one of the most significant works in the history of medicine.In the 1800s, autopsies became one of the most important courses of study at the Pathology Institute in Vienna. In fact, dissection was so important to the school that almost every cadaver in the entire area was autopsied there. The head of the institute, Karl Rokitansky, alone observed over seventy thousand autopsies during his tenure. Of those seventy thousand, Rokitansky performed thirty thousand. During his near half-century at the institute, Rokitansky participated in some form of autopsy at the rate of two per day, seven days per week, for forty-five years.In the 1920s, Charles Lindbergh flew from America to France, a Model T Ford could be purchased for $350, and refrigerators became an integral part of U.S. households. Women were also allowed to vote for the first time. Things looked bright for what was still a young country, but little did Americans know that bleak times were coming. The Great Depression was on its way.In spite of the impending doom, more historical milestones entered the history books in the 1920s. Alongside George Eastman's discovery of the camera and the first-ever radio broadcast was a monumental Massachusetts study of three thousand autopsies. The study generated alarming news that rocked the medical world. The medical community learned that doctors had been regularly misdiagnosing illnesses and disease. As a result of the eye-opening Massachusetts study, autopsy became a regular part of medical education.THE MODERN AUTOPSYIn the United States, it's the duty of either a coroner or a medical examiner to perform examinations of the dead for the purpose of discovering how a person died. It's also the duty of a coroner or medical examiner to decide if and when an autopsy is needed. The rule of thumb for determining if an autopsy is warranted is whether or not the cause of death is at all suspicious. Individual locales decide which to utilize, a coroner or a medical examiner.THE CORONERA coroner is an elected official who has the responsibility of investigating all circumstances that surround a suspicious death. U.S. law doesn't mandate that a coroner be a medical doctor. In fact, the only requirements for being a coroner in most states are that the candidate be a citizen of the jurisdiction where she's running for office, be of legal voting age, and be a registered voter.The state of Ohio is one state that requires all coroners to be licensed medical doctors. In some areas, the coroner's job is part-time, so, in addition to her official duties, a coroner normally has another full-time job. In some states, the sheriff or a local funeral director serves as coroner. In others, perhaps a gas station attendant or even the ticket-taker at the local movie theater may hold the position. Idaho's coroners aren't required to have any experience or qualifications at all. Some counties in the state of Washington even allow their prosecutors to serve as coroners.It's the coroner's duty to sign all death certificates. Since some coroners aren't medical doctors, they must employ or subcontract the services of forensic pathologists, who perform the actual autopsies and make the determination as to how the victim died. The coroner then records the official cause of death on the certificate.THE MEDICAL EXAMINERMedical examiners (or M.E.s), like coroners, are also responsible for determining the cause of unnatural or sudden deaths. Chief medical examiner is an appointed position for the most qualified person hired by city, county, or state officials. The person hired for the job must be a licensed medical doctor and forensic pathologist. In turn, the chief medical examiner may appoint deputy chief medical examiners to work in other facilities throughout the state or districts.Depending on the laws of the individual state or county, medical examiners are supervised by government officials or governing bodies. For example, in King County, Washington, the medical examiner works for the director of public health. In Spokane, Washington, the medical examiner works at the will of the board of county commissioners. In other areas of the country the medical examiner may even work for the county sheriff.California has different systems of operation from county to county. Counties in the state of Washington with a population of 200,000 or more can actually place the medical examiner issue on the ballot and have voters decide whether or not to have a medical examiner or a coroner.Like coroners, medical examiners are responsible for determining the cause of death in all suspicious circumstances, and they sign all death certificates. Unlike coroners, however, all medical examiners are medical doctors/pathologists, and they or their assistants — who are also pathologists — perform all autopsies.COLLECTING A BODY FROM A CRIME SCENEThe police are in charge of all crime scenes, but the coroner or medical examiner, depending which official serves the area, is in charge of the body. That body may not be moved without their permission. The police or emergency personnel should call the medical examiner or coroner to the scene in the case of any death that occurs outside of a hospital or a medical facility. The medical examiner or coroner can then make the determination if any further investigation is warranted.The Spokane County Medical Examiner's Office in Spokane, Washington, has a policy in place, as do most medical examiner's offices, that requires the medical examiner (or a designated assistant) to respond to all death scenes within one hour from the time the death is reported. A timely investigation normally provides the most accurate results. It also allows detectives to begin their investigations more quickly.Spokane Medical Examiner Sally Aiken, M.D., requires that she or someone from her staff respond to each scene where a death has been caused by suspected suicide, homicide, or as a result of a traffic accident. The presence of Dr. Aiken's staff is needed for all deaths in which the deceased is under the age of eighteen; for deaths that occur within a prison or jail; accidental deaths; and for any unusual and/or suspicious deaths, especially in cases where the victim has had no prior history of medical problems. Medical examiners and coroners are also called to the scene where a body has been discovered that's so badly decomposed the police can't properly identify the remains.Coroner's/medical examiner's investigators have the duty of gathering information surrounding a scene where a body's been found. They only collect facts about the decedent's medical history, the circumstances that led to the death, and sometimes the scene where the death took place. They search for clues regarding the cause of death, not necessarily for clues that lead to the perpetrator of the crime. Coroner's/medical examiner's investigators don't conduct criminal investigations. That's the job of the police.Coroner's/medical examiner's investigators aren't normally sworn police officers; therefore, they don't have the power to arrest or detain witnesses and suspects. When the time comes to make an arrest, a warrant is issued by the court, and the police are charged with serving it on the appropriate suspect.The duties of the coroner and medical examiner are specific. They're to determine the cause and time of death. To make these determinations, the body must first be examined for rigidity (the stiffening of the muscles after death) and lividity (the purplish coloration of the skin caused by the pooling of blood at the lowest points on a dead body).The positioning of the body is also an important factor in determining if the victim was found where he was killed or if he was killed elsewhere and moved after death.DETERMINING THE TIME OF DEATHInvestigators can make close determinations as to the time of death. The rule of thumb is that a body begins to stiffen (rigor mortis) two hours after death, beginning with the facial muscles then moving downward to the larger muscles of the lower body. As rigor mortis progresses, the body becomes more and more rigid until it's completely stiff, usually about eight to twelve hours after death. After rigor mortis reaches its peak, it remains that way for approximately sixteen to eighteen hours. The stiffness begins to dissipate in the exact order it began until the body returns to its normal flaccid and pliable condition in about twelve hours.Lividity begins immediately after the heart stops functioning. The cessation of the heart's pumping action allows gravity to pull blood to the lowest points of the body. There, in those low areas, the tissue begins to take on a purplish tint, much like a dark bruise. In fact, lividity appears so much like a bruise that laypeople and police officers who see a dead body for the first time sometimes think the victim has been badly beaten, especially if the victim is discovered lying facedown. When the body's rolled over, the face is sometimes badly discolored due to the collection of blood in the tissue.It's possible to see the effects of lividity within thirty minutes after the victim's heart stops beating. The pooling of blood reaches its peak eight to twelve hours after death. Lividity becomes fixed in six to eight hours; deterioration of blood vessels causes blood to leak into the surrounding tissue, permanently staining it. Until that process is complete, lividity can shift from one area of the body to another if the body is moved or turned. A body found lying face down with lividity on the back and buttocks is a clear indicator to detectives and medical examiners that the body has been moved at some point after the lividity became fixed.The police have the responsibility of securing the scene and protecting the body and evidence. They must provide security for the medical examiner and her staff as they conduct their examination of the body and the crime scene. The police don't conduct any physical examinations of the body other than to check for signs of life, such as pulse and respirations. Taking and recording body temperature isn't the responsibility of a police officer.Medical examiners and coroners use the interior temperature of the body and its surroundings as another means to determine the time of death. The normal temperature of the human body is approximately 98.6° F. When a person dies, his body begins to cool at a rate of approximately 1.5 degrees per hour until it reaches the same temperature as its surroundings. (If a person dies in a room where the temperature is 75° F and the body is discovered with a temperature of 86.6° F, investigators can conclude that the person has been dead for approximately eight hours.)Several factors can accelerate or reduce these results, such as extreme heat or cold. A body that's left outside in frigid weather cools much faster than one left in desert heat. Investigators should make note of the temperature of the area where the body was found so pathologists can take that into consideration when making their time-of-death calculations.TRANSPORTING THE BODYInvestigators should photograph the victim and the surrounding area where the body was discovered. All items of possible importance to identifying the victim (wallets, purses, clothing, identification cards) and the cause of death (medications and poisons) should be collected and transported, along with the body, to the morgue for examination. Any items deemed as evidence in the criminal investigation should be transferred to police investigators on the scene. It's important for the investigators and the medical examiner to work closely together.Coroner's/medical examiner's investigators should collect all medications found near the victim. They should place these items inside the body bag for transportation along with the body. Any ligatures (rope, wire, or cord used for strangling or choking) still attached to the body should be left in place. Under no circumstance should investigators cut or disturb these parts at the crime scene. The medical examiner doesn't normally collect weapons, such as guns and knives. These, along with any other hazardous materials such as explosives, narcotics, and syringes, are retained by police officers.Investigators (police, medical examiner, or coroner) should cover the hands of all victims of homicide or suicide with clean paper bags and fasten the bags with either tape or string. This procedure prevents the contamination or loss of evidence that could be found on the fingers, palms, or under or around the fingernails.The body of a homicide or suicide victim is removed from the scene under the direction of the medical examiner or coroner. Accident victims or people who died of natural causes may be picked up and transported by ambulance or funeral home personnel.Before the body is transported to the morgue, it's photographed and then placed in a heavy, plastic-coated body bag in front of witnesses. The leak-resistant bag should be sealed with a tamperproof seal. The victim should be transported to the morgue in the clothing that was found on the body. Forensic scientists could discover trace evidence on these items.Bodies are stored in walk-in refrigerated coolers.The body is removed and delivered to the morgue by the ambulance crew or coroner's/medical examiner's investigators. At the morgue, autopsy technicians receive the body, sign the appropriate receipts, and then transfer the body from the transport stretcher to a stainless steel gurney (still inside the sealed body bag). With the paperwork complete, they roll the gurney to a set of scales mounted into the floor. The body and the gurney are weighed together. The weight of the gurney is deducted (morgue gurneys weigh approximately 142 pounds), and the true weight of the body is recorded in the permanent record of the deceased.After weighing and measuring the body, autopsy technicians record the victim's personal information (name, weight, height, date and time of death, case number, etc.) on a toe tag. Then they tie the tag to the big toe of the victim. The remains are then placed into a cooler that's much like the walk-in coolers found in grocery stores or butcher shops. Refrigerated air retards the rate of decomposition of a body, which allows the medical examiner's team ample time to conduct any necessary investigations prior to autopsy. It's possible to keep a body refrigerated for several months before performing an autopsy.THE AUTOPSY PROCESSIn most morgues, several autopsies are scheduled throughout the day. At the appropriate time, an autopsy technician (or diener — the proper name for an autopsy technician, which means “servant”) retrieves the corresponding body and delivers it to the autopsy room.A medical examiner, assisted by one or more autopsy technicians, performs the autopsy. Any tasks carried out by the autopsy technicians are done only under the direct supervision of the attending pathologist.The morgue staff usually includes a chief medical examiner, one or more autopsy technicians or deputy medical examiners (depending upon the size of the jurisdiction), and one or more autopsy technicians. The medical examiner and the autopsy technicians conduct the autopsy. Medical students may be present during the autopsy, as observers, along with visiting doctors. Police academies sometimes Police academies sometimes require recruits to attend an autopsy as part of their basic training.Autopsy roomThe autopsy room is generally — as one would probably expect — windowless, quiet, and eerie. I've witnessed several autopsies in different jurisdictions, and the experience is always the same. The odor of raw flesh meanders among stainless steel tables and jars of formalin. White lab coats soiled with brownish red bloodstains hang loosely beside a doorway that houses a pair of electronically controlled doors. Florescent fixtures hum softly overhead and fill the room with cold light. Tiled walls and floors are dull and dingy from years of spilled blood. Banks of cabinets stand at the rear of the room. Glass-front doors expose an electric saw and other bone-cutting tools. Disposable face shields, similar to welding helmets, line the shelves beside the various other supplies. Polished steel sinks stand along the wall behind the row of autopsy tables. Over the years, I've noticed that, no matter how many attempts are made to mask the purpose of autopsy rooms, they all wind up looking exactly the same. Morbid.Sometimes, police investigators are present during the autopsy of homicide or suicide victims. Their presence isn't required unless they're there to take possession of evidence. It's a good idea, however, for police officers to attend an autopsy as a learning experience. The procedure enables the officer to see how physical evidence is retrieved from a body and what he can do at the crime scene to protect and preserve that evidence.THE EXTERNAL EXAMINATIONOnce the body has been delivered to the autopsy room (sometimes called an autopsy suite), it is removed from the sealed body bag and again weighed and photographed. Technicians position the body on a stainless steel autopsy table. The metal tables are equipped with running water and several holes for drainage. They're also tilted to allow fluids to run off and into the drainage holes.Autopsy table.With the body in place on the table, the autopsy technician places a hard rubber body post beneath the victim's back. The post raises the head and chest area upward to allow better access to the upper body. It also allows the arms and head to fall backward, slightly out of the way. The pathologist compares the information on the body bag seal, the toe tag, and the paperwork to ensure that she has the correct body before her. If all's well, the autopsy begins.The pathologist observes and notes any evidence of prior medical treatment on the victim, such as gastric and endotracheal tubes (life support may have been attempted on the scene by emergency medical personnel).In the case of an autopsy for a suspicious death, the autopsy commences with the tedious task of collecting trace evidence, such as hair and fibers. This examination is sometimes enhanced by the use of alternate light sources, such as black light.Bags are removed from the hands and labeled, right and left. Each bag is marked with a corresponding case number and the victim's name. The bags are packaged and retained for evidence.The victim's fingernails are trimmed to the quick, and the trimmings are collected and placed into paper evidence envelopes. The envelopes containing the nail clippings are also marked with the corresponding left and right hand. Some pathologists place the nail clippings from each finger in separate packages.The medical examiner examines the victim's clothing prior to removing it from the body. She looks for foreign particles and other trace evidence. She also searches the clothing for evidence of gunshot residue and holes and tears that could have been made by cutting implements such as knives, scissors, hatchets, and other edged weapons. If any breaches in the clothing are found, they're photographed, measured, and marked as evidence.Head and pubic hair are combed, and the loose hair, along with the comb, is packaged in paper containers. The packaging is labeled for future testing and comparison. Hair samples are plucked from the scalp in a systematic manner. They're plucked from each side, the top, the front, and the back of the head. The goal is to pluck approximately fifty hairs from each of the sites. These hairs are also packaged in paper containers such as envelopes. Random samples of beard and moustache hair are also plucked and saved.The victim's mouth is swabbed with sterile swabs. The swabs are used to make slides for examination under a microscope. These slides can be used for the detection of foreign elements, such as sperm. DNA testing may also be performed later, if necessary.To preserve the slides, the medical examiner sprays them with a fixative and allows them to dry. The slides are then packaged in paper or cardboard containers and sealed with evidence tape. The packaged slides are labeled with the appropriate case number.If the victim is female, the medical examiner must perform a vaginal examination. This exam is conducted much in the same manner as a normal gynecological exam. The medical examiner examines the vaginal area via speculum. Cotton swabs are used to conduct both vaginal and cervical smears, and slides are made from both locations. The slides are sprayed with fixative, packaged, and labeled. The same procedure is carried out in the anal area of both male and female victims.Sometimes insects are discovered when a body is presented for autopsy. If the time of death isn't known, the medical examiner may collect samples of each insect, such as maggots and beetles. Live bugs are collected and placed into suitable containers to preserve them. The cartons (half-pint containers are ideal) are filled with an inert material, such as vermiculite or loose soil. The insects must also be provided a food source, such as beef liver or pieces of raw meat.Dead insects are preserved by placing them into hot water (about the temperature of water used for a cup of hot tea or coffee) for two to three minutes, then transferring them to a 70 percent ethanol or isopropyl alcohol/30 percent sterile water solution. A forensic entomologist, who may be called into court to testify to his findings, examines both live and dead insect specimens.Body fluids, such as vitreous humor, blood, and urine, are collected and preserved for examination and testing. The policies of each morgue determine when these fluids are drawn and by whom. Some medical examiners insist upon drawing the fluids themselves, while others allow the collection to be performed by their autopsy technicians. Some fluid, such as vitreous humor, may be collected prior to the actual autopsy to save time.Vitreous humor is the transparent, gelatinous fluid that fills the space in the eyeball between the lens and retina. The fluid helps maintain the shape and pressure of the eyeball. During autopsy, a 10cc syringe is used to collect a sample of vitreous humor from each eye. A few drops of the fluid are deposited on a factory-prepared analysis strip to test for the presence of alcohol, dehydration, ketones, and glucose (high or low levels of blood sugar). The remaining fluid is placed into a red-topped vial and sealed.Scientists and medical professionals use vials topped with various colored stoppers to identify their contents and purpose. These vials come from the factory with certain additives for various functions.Red-topped vials: contain no additives and are used for specimens that don't require any added preservatives.Blue-topped vials: contain sodium citrate for coagulation studies.Gray-topped vials: contain potassium oxalate, another anticoagulate for collecting plasma.Orange-topped vials: contain thrombin and are used for inducing coagulation, usually within five minutes.Yellow-topped vials: contain acid citrate dextrose, which prevents coagulation, and are for use in paternity testing and transplant capability.Green-topped vials: contain heparin for anticoagulation studies.Purple-topped vials: contain ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) for hematology (blood) studies and for potential DNA testing. (You may remember the purple-topped vial from the O.J. Simpson case. Blood droplets were found at the scene that contained small amounts of EDTA. The defense raised the issue that police officers had possibly brought blood to the scene — hoping to frame O.J. — that had been stored in a purple-topped vial, even though human blood naturally contains small amounts of EDTA.)The medical examiner measures the length of the victim's body, and then one of the technicians cleans the body. The cleansing process is simple — the body is rinsed off with a water hose. If needed, X-rays of the body are taken at this time.THE INTERNAL POSTMORTEM EXAMINATIONThe internal examination begins with the medical examiner or an assisting autopsy technician making a “Y” incision. A “Y” incision is actually a series of either two or three individual cuts. The technician inserts a scalpel at the front of one shoulder and slices from that point to the tip of the xiphoid process (the lowest point of the breastbone). She can either stop the incision there or curve downward toward the feet, continuing the cut until she reaches the area of the pubic bone (making a slight detour around the belly-button). She then makes another incision into the opposite shoulder, slicing until the incision meets the previous cut at the xiphoid process. The resulting cuts form the “Y.”The technician then peels the skin and surrounding tissue away from the chest area, exposing the ribs. To completely expose the ribcage, she may have to slice away any connecting tissue remaining between the flesh and rib bones. The loose skin and muscle tissue now hang freely to the sides of the chest.Using an electric bone saw or a manual bone cutter (which resembles a gardener's pruning shears), the technician severs the ribs and chest plate. When the cut is complete, the chest plate and ribs are lifted out of the upper body in one solid triangular-shaped piece and laid to the side until the autopsy is complete. The muscle wall of the abdomen is also severed from the lower portion of the ribcage. The interior organs of the body are now fully exposed and ready for examination. The odor that's emitted from the interior portion of a human body closely resembles that of the inside of a butcher shop. Its scent is quite similar to raw animal meat.Blood that's seeped into the chest and abdominal cavities is scooped out with a plastic cup and measured in a tall, flask-like container, called a graduated cylinder. If the victim's been dead for a while, the technician may need to collect decomposition fluids from the body cavity as well.All internal organs (including the testes) are removed, weighed, and dissected. They're sliced much like one would slice a loaf of bread and are examined for any abnormalities such as necrosis (dead tissue) or for any foreign objects such as bullets. Gunshot wounds are examined for a bullet's path of travel, if possible. This information can sometimes assist investigators in determining the position and location of the shooter in relation to the victim.After dissection, portions of each organ are placed into containers filed with formalin. The medical examiner performs a microscopic examination of each organ and tissue sample sometime after the autopsy is complete.The brain is the last organ to be examined, and this is part of the autopsy where the lay observer usually becomes the most squeamish. The autopsy technician uses a scalpel to make a cut through the scalp behind one ear, and then slices around the back of the head to the other ear. The scalp is then stripped away from the skull and peeled over the top of the head until it comes to rest over the face. The top of the skull is now exposed and ready for cutting. To make the cut into the skull, the technician uses an electric saw, sometimes called a Stryker saw — named after a particular brand name of an electric bone saw. Another popular brand of bone saw is the Thermo Shandon autopsy saw.The technician guides the saw all the way around the head, pausing only once to form a triangular notch in the back of the skull. This notch ensures that the top portion of the skull is properly aligned when it's replaced after the brain cavity examination. The technician must take care not to cut so deep that he cuts into the soft tissue of the brain.The sound made by the saw is quite similar to, but much louder than, a dentist's drill. The high-pitched whirring combined with the stench of hot, burning bone is an experience many police officers never forget.After the skull cut is complete, the technician uses a small, stainless steel hammer and chisel to tap the top portion of the skull loose from the bottom half. The sound that's made when the technician removes the top portion of the skull closely resembles the noise made when pulling a foot free from sticky mud, or by pulling apart two halves of a piece of juicy fruit.The top section of skull is laid to the side. The victim's brain is partially exposed but is still covered by a clear, tough membrane called the dura. The technician strips away the dura with a plier-like device called dura strippers. The brain is now ready for removal. The final step in the removal of the brain is to sever the spinal cord. The technician cuts the cord and pulls the brain free from the skull.The brain is a very soft and spongy organ. In fact, it's so soft that dissection of it at this point is sometimes difficult. In this case, the technician places it into a brain bucket (a plastic bucket that's the perfect size to receive and contain a human brain) filled with formalin, where it remains for several days. The formalin fixes (firms up) the tissue, allowing for proper dissection and slicing. If the brain is ready to dissect at the autopsy, it's placed on a cutting board much like the ones found in most home kitchens and is cross-sectioned.When all organs are outside the body, the medical examiner can examine them thoroughly. The medical examiner's job is done when the last organ has been dissected, with individual sections prepared for microscopic study or preservation for future reference. Even then, though, the autopsy process itself is far from over.Obviously, a body obviously can't be left as it is after an autopsy. A standing joke among medical examiners and autopsy technicians is that bodies make really great “human canoes” because all that's left after an autopsy is an empty hull.The autopsy technician must reassemble the body before it's picked up by funeral home personnel. He begins by replacing the top of the skull (sometimes minus the brain), lining up the precut notch to prevent slipping, pulls the scalp back into place, and sews it together with a very heavy twine. The stitched wound can't be seen once the body is resting in a casket, with its head on a satin pillow. The internal organs are dealt with in different ways. Some medical examiners put the remaining sliced organs back into the chest cavity, while others place them in a garbage bag and position the entire bag inside the empty body. The ribs are returned to their proper places, and the trunk is stitched with zigzag stitches (like the ones on baseballs), leaving behind a huge “Y”-shaped, stitched wound on the front of the body.The autopsy technician is now responsible for cleaning the body and the autopsy room, using a sponge and a water hose for the body and a mop and bucket for the room. After cleaning, the body is placed into a thin, paper body bag that's used mainly for transporting bodies from the morgue to a funeral home.The funeral home selected by the family is notified by the medical examiner that the body is ready to be picked up. If the family of the deceased isn't known, the body is kept in the cooler at the morgue for a period of time in case someone shows up to claim it. If the body remains unclaimed, it's either buried in a state cemetery or incinerated.After the final testing of the organs, the toxicology, and the other testing is complete, the medical examiner issues a formal report stating the cause of death. In the event of a homicide, the report is forwarded to the investigating officer, and the murder investigation has another chapter in the file.Family members may request an autopsy, but if the coroner or medical examiner hasn't ordered it, they may have to bear the entire cost of the procedure. The fee for a private autopsy in one rural Ohio county is $1,500 — $500 for the use of the coroner's facility and equipment, $250 for the coroner's autopsy technician (clean up and suturing of the body upon completion of the autopsy), and $750 for the forensic pathologist's fee. There are additional fees for toxicology testing and transportation of the body. A basic toxicology panel (drug and alcohol screening) costs approximately two hundred dollars. Transportation fees vary but include the salaries of two employees and vehicle and equipment use. There would be other fees for additional laboratory testing.Family members may also request that an autopsy not be performed due to their religious beliefs. Medical examiners and coroners try to honor these requests but are sometimes unable to due so because of pending criminal proceedings. Judges sometimes order autopsies to be conducted in cases where the only means to catch a dangerous criminal suspect would be through autopsy.IN THE LINE OF DUTY HOLD THE LIVER …I witnessed my first autopsy during my training in the police academy. It was a shocking event, to say the least. I can still smell the stench of death in the far corners of my mind and, I don't hesitate to say, the odors of that day will never leave my memory.My entire class and I were paraded through the cold room where the bodies were kept as they awaited their turn on the “table.” Each of the dearly departed was wrapped in heavy, translucent plastic, which did nothing to prevent me from seeing their gaping mouths and the lavendar-gray skin of their naked torsos.We exited, one by one, from the cooler into the actual autopsy suite where the medical examiner stood waiting. She was dressed in full medical examiner attire, complete with little paper booties. She answered a couple of questions from our group and then turned her attention to her attendant who, honestly, looked as if he belonged in a Frankenstein movie.I sensed the coldness of the room for the first time when the medical examiner's attendant removed the covering from the body — an elderly man who had died from a gunshot wound to the chest. His toothless mouth was frozen open, and his eyes stared upward. He was naked, and I couldn't help thinking how humiliated he would be were he alive. The medical examiner began to speak into a microphone hanging from the ceiling. The autopsy had begun, and the realization hit me that I was standing in a human butcher shop.The morgue attendant pushed a cart into the room and left it beside the table; the cart held stainless steel instruments designed for cutting, sawing, prying, and tearing. The medical examiner spoke out loud, announcing the date, time, and the name of the victim, as well as the names of all persons present. She began to examine the body from head to toe and front to back. The others and I listened as she described, both to us and to the microphone, each of her findings. She completed the initial external examination and, without hesitation, made the “Y” incision into the chest. Her gloved hands deftly pulled a large scalpel through the flesh, creating a gaping, bloodless wound beneath the steel blade.INTERESTING AUTOPSY FACTSBlood decomposes at a faster rate than tissue or organs. It's possible to discover, during an autopsy, that gases resulting from decomposition have replaced blood in the vessels.Medical examiners sometimes regard the dissection knife as a personal tool and, not wanting others to use it, keep it with them in a briefcase or in their office until autopsy time.Medical examiners often refer to forceps as “pick-ups.”Visitors often smear Noxzema or other fragrant creams under their noses during an autopsy to mask the odors.Bullets removed from shooting victims are turned over to the investigating officer as evidence after the autopsy and forensic tests are complete.Hospital and legally required autopsies are performed free.The law doesn't require a body to be embalmed unless it's being transported a long distance or if the burial doesn't take place within thirty-six hours of death.With the aid of her assistant, the medical examiner peeled the skin back and away from the man's skinny chest, with the upper flap resting near his face. The morgue attendant cut apart the exposed ribs with a tool specifically designed to cut bone. The instrument looked like a gardener's tree-limb lopper or tree pruner. When he pulled the victim's ribs apart, a new stench seeped into the room. It was nearly overwhelming, and a couple of my classmates had to leave the room quickly.A small amount of flesh remained attached to the man's exposed ribs. The medical examiner cleanly sliced away those tiny bits and removed the ribcage. The heart and lungs were now exposed. The medical examiner used both gloved hands to reach inside the chest cavity to palpate the organs, attempting to detect blood clots or other abnormalities. Apparently satisfied there were none, she removed the organs, one at a time. Positioning each organ on the scales, she announced their weights into the microphone. One by one, I noticed more of my classmates leaving the room. When they returned, moments later, they stood just a little farther away from the table, and each looked a little woozy.The medical examiner was pulling on a portion of the liver with a pair of “pick-ups,” or forceps, when a tiny piece of the slimy organ meat broke free and landed squarely on my cheek. Two additional class members headed for the door, and the rest stood staring at me, wondering what I was going to do about the situation. For a moment I just stood there. My stomach was telling me what it thought I should do, but that wasn't an option in front of all these people. Besides, the medical examiner performing the autopsy was very famous. I simply wouldn't allow myself to be sick in front of such a high-profile doctor.She casually pointed, with a blood-covered hand, to a roll of paper towels on the table beside her. I tore one from the roll and wiped away the tiny piece of human liver. She watched me, from behind a surgical mask and protective glasses, as I deposited the soiled paper into a stainless steel garbage can. The room was totally silent. The medical examiner raised her eyebrows. I took the gesture as her way of asking if I was all right. I nodded; she turned around and continued the exam as if nothing had happened. Apparently, I passed the test, but to this day I have a difficult time eating liver and onions.THE FUNERAL HOMEOnce the body's been released to the family, funeral home representatives are dispatched to the morgue to pick up the remains. They're required to sign a receipt for the body and for any personal effects the family hasn't already retrieved. Evidential items are turned over to the investigating police officers. The mortuary employees take the body to the funeral home to prepare it for viewing and burial.Once the body has arrived at the funeral home, it's removed from the body bag and placed on a stainless steel table much like the one in the autopsy room.The funeral director (mortician) washes the body with a mixture of insecticide and germicide. The body is positioned on its back, with the hands folded across the stomach. The director's next step is to shave the face, if that's the desired look. Then, he packs the nose with cotton filler so it retains its shape, and rounded, plastic eye-caps are placed beneath the eyelids. Super Glue is sometimes used to keep the eyelids tightly closed. Cotton or gauze is packed into the throat and other openings of the body to prevent fluid leakage. The mouth is kept closed by thin wires twisted together and attached to a tack on each jaw. The lips are held in place with thin sutures or glue. A moisturizing cream is applied to the lips to prevent them from appearing too dry.EMBALMINGNow, with all the preparations complete, it's time for the director to introduce the embalming fluid into the body. (Note that although no law states that a body must be embalmed, tradition nearly mandates that the process be performed unless the family chooses to cremate their loved one.)The practice of embalming doesn't stop the process of decomposition. It merely slows it down and changes the way a body decomposes. Instead of rotting away (putrefaction), it oxidizes (components of the body lose their electrons) and basically dissolves. Like the process where the forensic pathologist preserves tissue samples for examination by “fixing” them in a solution of formalin, a funeral director temporarily preserves the cell proteins of the body by injecting a formaldehyde solution. The chemical causes the dissolvable proteins in blood to turn into a gel. Simultaneously, formalin kills bacteria, which further slows the decomposition process.If possible, the director makes an incision in the carotid artery located in the notch between the Adam's apple and the large muscle of the neck (sternocleidomastoid muscle). If not, he makes the incision in the femoral artery in the upper thigh near the groin. One end of a flexible tube is inserted into the artery. The opposite end of the tube is attached to the embalming machine. Another tube is inserted into the artery's corresponding vein. The opposite end of that tube is placed into a drain that leads directly into the city sewer or septic system. There are no laws that prevent a funeral home from dumping body fluids into public utility systems.With all tubing securely in place, the director switches on the embalming machine. The machine instantly pumps the pinkish embalming fluid into the body's vascular system. The pumping action forces the fluid in through the artery and pushes blood out the tube attached to the vein. The discarded blood flows into the sewer system. The machine is turned off when the color of the exiting fluid turns from blood red to embalming-fluid pink. That color change is the indication that embalming fluid has replaced the blood in the body.The director fills the three-gallon reservoir of the electric embalming machine with a mixture of water and embalming fluid (eight ounces of water per one gallon of fluid).When the vascular system is full of embalming fluid, the director withdraws each of the tubes and sutures the incisions to prevent leakage of the solution. A chemical preservative is injected into the abdominal cavity, unless the body has undergone an autopsy. In this case, the director removes the autopsy sutures from the “Y” incision and introduces the liquid preservative directly into the plastic bag containing the organs. The director then resutures the opening in the abdominal cavity. Funeral directors may elect to incinerate the internal organs or leave them in place, but if they're removed, a filler material must be used to “inflate” the chest wall to its normal position before viewing.After the completion of the fluid transfer, the body is again thoroughly cleaned. Muscles, stiffened by rigor mortis, are massaged to make them more pliable (for the application of clothing and proper limb positioning), and a skin softening cream is applied to the face and hands to prevent drying. Missing tissue and flesh are repaired with molded wax.The next step is the placement of the body into a casket that's been selected by the family. Once the body's been placed into the casket, the funeral home staff applies flesh-colored makeup to disguise any imperfections on any parts of the body that may be visible during the viewing. Some funeral homes employ makeup and hair specialists, while others call in outside cosmetologists from local salons.
