---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_013.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["body", "death", "may", "autopsy", "examination", "evidence", "victim", "wound", "forensic", "first", "disease", "chapter", "medical", "cause", "time", "pathologist", "injury", "trace", "coroner", "report", "performed", "removed", "see", "bullet", "one"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit013html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 3 
THE AUTOPSY: 
A LOOK INSIDE THE BODY  
The terms autopsy, post-mortem examination, and necropsy are used interchangeably but mean the same thing—the examination of the dead. The word autopsy means “to view one’s self.” A better term would be necropsy. Necro means “death,” so necropsy means “to look at death.” However, autopsy is the term that has been traditionally used since the Middle Ages.
HISTORY OF THE AUTOPSY  
As early as 3500 B.c. the Mesopotamians conducted autopsies on animals in the hopes of communicating with certain divine forces. They believed that many of the animal’s organs, most notably the liver, carried messages from the gods. Ancient Egyptians performed a form of autopsy as they prepared corpses for the journey to the other side. As part of the mummification process, the abdomen would be opened and the internal organs (except for the heart) would be removed and placed in ceremonial jars within the burial chamber. The brain was extracted in pieces through the nose. These ancient cultures performed these procedures for religious and spiritual reasons and not as a search for medical knowledge.
The first true autopsies done to gain medical knowledge were likely those performed by Erasistratus (c. 304–250 B.c.), founder of Alexandria’s school of anatomy, and Herophilus (c. 335–280 B.c.), who discovered that arteries and veins were anatomically different, during the third century B.c. The renowned physician and surgeon to the gladiators Galen (131–200 A.D.) dissected both animals and humans in an attempt to prove that Hippocrates’ Four Humours theory of disease causation was correct. For centuries after Galen, the Greeks, Roman, Egyptians, and Medieval Europeans performed autopsies in order to learn anatomy. This was done in a fairly haphazard fashion since medicine was poorly organized and the church cast a wary eye toward such procedures.
Pope Clement VI (1291–1352) ordered that autopsies be done on victims of the Black Death in the hopes of finding a cause for the plague that killed 25 to 35 million people, or between a third and half of Europe’s population. It is curious that, even though it was widely believed that this bubonic plague was due to supernatural causes, witchcraft, or as punishment for mankind’s evil, the Pope sought an anatomical reason for it. Of course, none was found because the tools and knowledge to uncover the true cause were still centuries away.
In the late 1400s, the first medical schools appeared at Bologna and Padua in Italy, and Pope Sixtus IV (1414–1484) allowed human dissections as a part of medical and surgical training. It would be another 250 years before the autopsy became the useful tool it is today. Giovanni Morgagni (1682–1771), in his long and stellar career as professor of anatomy in Padua, was the first to correlate the findings at autopsy with various diseases. He showed that disease was caused by and in turn caused anatomical changes in the human body. The fields of gross anatomy (the study of anatomy with the naked eye) and pathology were born. Around the same time, Antony van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) invented the microscope, an instrument that opened up the microscopic world to scientists. But it would be another two centuries before German pathologist Rudolph Virchow (1821–1902), using Leeuwenhoek’s invention, established the roots of cellular biology and anatomy. He found that not only did disease cause visible changes in organs, as Morgagni had pointed out, but also led to changes in the cells of the body.
During a harsh winter on St. Croix Island in 1604, French colonists performed the first documented autopsies in North America when nearly half of the seventy-nine settlers died. Archeological and historical evidence suggests that several autopsies were performed in the hopes of uncovering what was killing so many members of the community.
FORENSIC AUTOPSY MILESTONES 
• Erasistratus and Herophilus performed the first post-mortem examinations in order to study disease states in Alexandria in the third century B.c.
• Galen, surgeon to the gladiators in Pergamum, dissected corpses and wrote extensively on human anatomy.
• A Roman physician examined the body of the slain Julius Caesar and determined that of his twenty-three stab wounds only the one to his heart was fatal.
• The first true forensic autopsies were completed in the 1200s at the University of Bologna.
• In 1235, Sung Tz’u’s Hsi Yuan Lu (The Washing Away of Wrongs), a forensic manual, was published in China. In part, it described how to examine murder victims as an aid to solving the crime.
• Ambroise Paré (1510–1590), a famous French military surgeon to four French kings, used cauterization and ligature of arteries rather than amputation for war wounds and pioneered the use of turpentine as a wound antiseptic. He wrote extensively on the anatomical features of war and homicidal wounds.
• In 1642, the University of Leipzig first began offering courses in the field of forensic medicine.
• Giovanni Morgagni performed and carefully recorded many autopsies on victims of murder.
• French physician François-Emmanuel Fodéré (1764–1835) published his Traité de médecine légale et d’hygiène publique in 1798, a landmark book in forensic medicine.
• Andrew Duncan (1744–1828) began lecturing on legal medicine at Edinburgh University in 1801, and in 1807, his son Andrew (1773–1832) became the first Professor of Medical Jurisprudence, or forensic medicine.
• In 1813, surgeon James S. Stringham (1775–1817), who studied at Edinburgh, became the first Professor of Medical Jurisprudence in the United States.
• Berlin medical professor Johann Ludwig Casper (1796–1864) published his Gerichtliche Leichenöffnung (Forensic Dissection) in 1850, and Practical Manual of Forensic Medicine in 1856, both becoming international textbooks. He was the first to use color lithographs to illustrate forensic pathology. 
THE PATHOLOGIST: CLINICAL VS. FORENSIC  
Pathology comes from the Greek words pathos, which means “disease,” and logos, which means “the study of.” Thus, pathology is the study of disease.
The medical specialty of pathology began in the 1800s. By the beginning of the twentieth century, gross (naked eye) and microscopic pathology began to drive a rapid progression in our understanding of disease and death. By the mid1900s, pathologists began to separate along subspecialty lines. The anatomical pathologist dealt primarily with disease states and used the autopsy and tissues removed at surgery to conduct his studies. The clinical pathologist involved himself primarily with laboratory testing and the diagnosis of disease. Today, general medical or clinical pathologists are concerned with both areas.
The clinical pathologist oversees the hospital lab to assure quality and to interpret lab tests. He consults with treating physicians in all specialties and helps them with the diagnosis and treatment of the living. The post-mortem exams He performs are medical autopsies, which are designed to determine the cause of death and to search for the presence of any other diseases.
On the other hand, a forensic pathologist is concerned with the interface of pathology and the law. He is more likely to deal with injuries and death than he is with disease. He performs forensic autopsies and is often required to testify in court regarding his findings and opinions.
THE FORENSIC AUTOPSY  
A forensic pathologist typically performs forensic autopsies, though in some areas, a medical pathologist may be the designated ME and be charged with this duty.
The forensic autopsy is performed to answer four questions (covered more extensively in other chapters).
1. What is the cause of death? What illness or injury led to the death? (Chapter Six) 
2. What is the mechanism of death? What physiological derangement actually resulted in death? (Chapter Six) 
3. What is the manner of death? Was the death natural, accidental, suicidal, or homicidal? (Chapter Six) 
4. What was the time of death? (Chapter Five)  
WHO GETS AUTOPSIED?
The coroner typically investigates any death that is traumatic, unusual, sudden, or unexpected. In most areas, approximately 1 percent of the population dies each year. About one quarter of these will come to the attention of the coroner or ME. In most deaths, the physician who has cared for the person will sign the death certificate and the coroner will accept his determination that the death was natural. If the attending physician is uncomfortable with a particular situation or if he feels that the death is in any way suspicious, he may request the ME’s involvement.
The ME may or may not perform an autopsy in any particular situation. Whenever he reviews a case, he has several options for handling it. In the case of a terminally ill individual or one that is very old and chronically ill, he may perform no testing and deem the death a natural occurrence. In other cases, such as victims of automobile or industrial accidents, he may perform a cursory exam and order toxicology testing to see if the person was chemically impaired in any way. If neither of these suggests something more sinister than an accidental death, he may sign it out as exactly that. Sometimes he will perform a partial autopsy. If the victim died from a head injury in a fall or in an industrial accident, the ME may only examine the head and brain before filing his report. Or he may perform a complete forensic autopsy. It’s his call.
The laws that govern situations in which the coroner will perform an autopsy vary among jurisdictions, though most operate under similar guidelines. The terms reportable death or coroner’s case mean any death that must, by law, be reported to the coroner for his investigation. The following are common situations that would lead to involvement of the coroner and the performance of a post-mortem examination:
• violent deaths (accidents, homicides, suicides) 
• deaths at the workplace (either traumatic or from poison or toxin exposure) 
• deaths that are suspicious, sudden, or unexpected 
• deaths that occur while incarcerated or in police custody 
• deaths that are unattended by a physician, that occur within twenty-four hours of admission to a hospital, or that occur in any situation where the victim is admitted while unconscious and never regains consciousness prior to death 
• deaths that occur during medical or surgical procedures 
• deaths that occur during an abortion, whether medical, self, or illegal 
• a found body, whether known or unidentified 
• before a body can be cremated or buried at sea 
• at the request of the court  
But not all cases that fall into one of these categories will be autopsied. The coroner or ME has the final say. If the cause of death is obvious and the circumstances are not suspicious, the coroner may accept a cause of death and a death certificate signed by any physician.
For example, a physician may believe that the death of his patient was a natural occurrence even though the patient died unattended at home or within the first twenty-four hours of hospital admission. If the patient had severe heart disease or cancer or any disease where death is likely, the physician may sign the death certificate and the coroner may accept it. No autopsy or further investigation is done.
THE AUTOPSY PROCEDURE  
An autopsy is a scientific procedure. Its purpose is to examine the corpse for evidence of the cause and manner of death. This is done through a gross (naked eye) and microscopic examination of the body as well as toxicological (drugs and poisons), serology (blood), and any other ancillary testing the ME deems necessary. It may seem obvious, but it is worth mentioning, that the autopsy must be performed before the body is embalmed. Embalming fluid alters the appearance of wounds and prevents accurate toxicological testing.
The timing of the autopsy depends upon many factors. It may be done immediately or several days after the body is collected. Weekends and holidays, excessive workload, and the need to ship the body to a larger lab may cause a delay. During this time period, the body is stored in a refrigerated vault. Storage of up to four or five days results in little noticeable deterioration of the corpse.
Each pathologist has his own method of doing things, but for the most part, the forensic autopsy follows a common protocol. Many of the steps overlap and some may be performed in a different order, depending upon the nature of the situation. The steps typically include:
• identification of the deceased 
• photography of the body, clothed and unclothed 
• removal of any trace evidence 
• measuring and weighing the body 
• x-raying all or parts of the body 
• external examination of the body 
• dissection of the body 
• microscopic examination of any tissues removed during the examination 
• toxicological and other laboratory examinations  
After the ME has completed the autopsy exam and reviewed all the ancillary materials, he will file a final report and give his opinion.
Let’s look at each of these steps in greater detail.
IDENTIFICATION: Identification of the deceased is critical. If the death becomes the subject of a criminal proceeding, there must be no doubt as to who the deceased was. If the identification is not confirmed, the evidence gleaned from the body will be of little use in court.
Usually, the identity of the person is not in question. Family members or friends come forward and offer this information. If not, photos, fingerprints, and dental records may be used.
PHOTOGRAPHY: The body is photographed, both clothed and unclothed. Frontal and profile photos of the face and body are important, particularly if the victim’s identity hasn’t been thoroughly established. Every injury, scar, birthmark, tattoo, and unusual physical feature must be adequately recorded.
TRACE EVIDENCE: Before the body is moved for measuring and weighing and before any other examination is done, a diligent search for trace evidence is undertaken. This is to avoid the loss or contamination of these delicate evidence items during the other examinations. The ME carefully scrutinizes the corpse and any clothing for hairs, fibers, fluid stains, and other bits of trace evidence. He employs a magnifying glass and often an alternative light source such as laser or ultraviolet or infrared light. The clothing is carefully removed, packaged, and taken to a clean environment for further examination and a more diligent search for trace evidence.
MEASURING AND WEIGHING: This is the first step in the actual post-mortem examination of the body. The ME records these measurements along with age, sex, race, and hair and eye color.
X-RAYS: X-rays of traumatized areas often reveal bony and some types of internal soft-tissue injuries, as well as foreign bodies whose general shape and size may help identify the murder weapon. In stab wounds, they may reveal that the tip of the knife broke off and remained behind. They are extremely useful in gunshot wounds. Bullets are unpredictable and move in unusual paths through the body, particularly if they strike bones. X-rays may help locate the bullet’s final resting place so that the bullet can be retrieved for ballistic examination. For example, a bullet may enter the chest, strike a rib or the spinal column, deflect downward through the diaphragm, and settle in the pelvic area. An extensive search of the chest will not find the bullet, but an X-ray of the abdomen or the entire body can reveal its location.
Also, bullets tend to deform and break up, leaving behind chips and fragments, which show the bullet’s path through the body. This may be useful in crime scene reconstruction, since knowing the bullet’s path may indicate where the victim and the assailant were standing in relation to each other at the time the gun discharged.
EXTERNAL EXAMINATION: The external examination of the body should commence at the crime scene if at all possible. The ME should visit the scene before the body has been moved but this is not always practical. The advantage is that this will give him an overall view of the body and the crime scene. He can see the body’s position and its relationship to other crime scene evidence such as the perpetrator’s points of entry and escape, weapons, or blood spatters. Photographs help, but being there gives a clearer picture.
It is important to note that this crime scene examination does not include the ME touching or moving the body any more than is absolutely necessary. This helps to avoid the loss or contamination of any evidence related to the body.
For the same reasons, when the body is removed from the scene, it must be done carefully. In traumatic deaths, the hands of the victim should be covered with paper bags to protect any trace evidence on the victim’s hands or beneath the fingernails before the body is moved. Usually the body is wrapped in clean plastic sheets and then placed in a clean body bag. These wrappings collect any trace evidence that falls from the body while at the same time prevent the accumulation of any foreign materials that could confuse or contaminate any evidence later retrieved. Once in the lab, the body is removed from the transport wrappings and placed on the autopsy table. The sheets are then taken to the crime lab where a search for trace evidence is done.
The pathologist focuses on the body. During his initial exam, the body is clothed. He searches for trace evidence such as hair, fibers, gunshot residues, semen, saliva, or bloodstains. Any findings are photographed and collected. He also looks for damage to the clothes that might correspond to injuries on the body. For example, do the defects in the victim’s shirt match the gunshot or stab wounds found on the body? If not, it brings up the possibility that the corpse was re-dressed after death in an attempt to stage the scene. After his exam, the clothing is carefully removed, in order to avoid the loss of any trace evidence, and sent to the crime lab for processing.
Next, the ME determines the state of rigor mortis and the presence and location of any livor mortis (see Chapter Five: Time of Death, “Livor Mortis”). Knowing the position the body was in at the time it was discovered and knowing the location of the livor mortis may indicate whether the body was moved after death.
He searches for scars (traumatic or surgical), tattoos, birthmarks, and any skin lesions or abnormalities, which are photographed and diagramed. These may be particularly useful if the body has yet to be identified.
Trace evidence found on the corpse is examined, photographed, and collected, just as with the examination of the clothed body. In cases of traumatic death, the victim’s fingernails are clipped and scraped. Hair, blood, and tissue from the assailant may be found if the victim struggled with the attacker. In a sexual assault case, the pubic hair is combed to search for hair from the rapist. Also, vaginal and anal swabs for semen are obtained. The ME takes samples of the victim’s head, eyebrow, eyelash, and pubic hair for comparison with any foreign hair found on or around the body. All collected trace evidence is then sent to the crime lab for further evaluation.
Fingerprints are taken after all trace evidence, particularly fingernail clippings or scrapings, has been obtained. This is delayed until this time because the mere action of opening or prying open the hand for printing may result in loss of small bits of evidentiary material.
Injuries, whether old or recent, are examined and photographed. A diagram showing the location of the wounds on the body and their positions is marked relative to anatomical landmarks. For example, a stab wound to the chest is located by its distance from the top of the head, the heel of one foot, the midline of the body, and the nipple on the same side as the wound. This detail may be important in crime scene reconstruction. The exact location of the wound may suggest that the assailant was a certain height or was right-or left-handed. This may also help exonerate a suspect. What if the suspect is simply too short to have stabbed the 6-foot-4 victim in the neck with a downward motion?
Contusions (bruises) from blunt trauma are measured and photographed. If widely scattered over the arms, legs, and torso of the victim, they may suggest that a struggle took place or that the victim was tortured before death. Bruises and cuts on the arms and hands may indicate that the victim attempted to defend himself from his attacker. Such injuries are called defensive wounds. Contusions may be seen around the throat in cases of manual or ligature strangulation (see Chapter Eight: Asphyxia, “Ligature Strangulation”).
If the murder weapon is available, the ME might compare it to the injuries in order to determine if it is the device that caused the injuries. He may use X-rays to help. In a death from blunt force trauma (see Chapter Seven: Bodily Harm, “Blunt Force Trauma”), a depressed skull fracture or a series of fractured ribs whose dimensions mirror that of the suspected murder weapon can be important evidence.
In stabbings, the ME carefully determines how many wounds are present, if possible. In some passionate or “overkill” homicides, there may be so many wounds that an accurate count isn’t possible. If so, the ME determines the minimum number of wounds. He then measures the width, thickness, and depth of each. This examination includes an attempt to determine if the blade or blades were single- or double-edged and which wound was the killing thrust (see Chapter 7: Bodily Harm, “Sharp Force Injuries”). This information may be critical if there was more than one assailant, since it may directly impact any charges levied against the perpetrators. The perpetrator whose wound actually caused the death of the victim might face the more serious charges. Hesitation wounds often accompany suicide attempts involving a knife. These are small nicks and cuts inflicted by the person as he gathers the courage to make a real cut.
Gunshot entry wounds are measured and photographed. The ME makes an assessment of the angle of entry and the gun’s distance from the body at the time of discharge (see Chapter Seven: Bodily Harm, “Guns and Bullets”), since these can be critical in distinguishing suicide from homicide. As I pointed out before, X-rays are helpful in following the bullet’s path through the body and in locating its final resting place. This information is used during the dissection to find the bullet and to assess the extent of any organ and tissue damage it may have inflicted.
Figure 3-1: The Y incision. This incision allows access to the abdominal contents as well as the removal of the breastplate for examining and removing the heart and lungs. 
DISSECTION: Dissection is the opening of the body for internal examination. This is accomplished by making a Y incision (see Figure 3-1). This incision has three arms: Two extend from each shoulder down to the lower end of the sternum (breast bone), the third continues down the midline of the abdomen to the pubis. The ribs and clavicles (collarbones) are then cut with a saw or shears and the breastplate is removed, exposing the heart, lungs, and blood vessels of the chest.
The heart and lungs are sequentially removed, though most often they are removed en bloc (in one unit). Blood for typing, DNA analysis, and toxicological testing is often taken from the heart, the aorta, or a peripheral vessel. One blood sample is placed in a tube containing sodium fluoride, which retards bacterial growth. This is important because some yeasts and bacteria actually produce alcohol as a byproduct of their metabolic processes. If testing is delayed several days, the blood alcohol level may be falsely elevated. Sodium fluoride lessens this likelihood.
Figure 3-2: Removing the brain. The steps include the incision and forward reflection of the scalp, and the sawing and removal of a portion of the skull. 
After this, the ME turns his attention to the abdomen. Each organ is weighed and examined, and samples are taken for microscopic examination.
Stomach contents may help in the determination of the time of death if the content and timing of the victim’s last meal is known (see Chapter 5: Time of Death, “The Last Mean”). Stomach contents, ocular (eye) fluid, bile from the gall bladder, urine, and liver tissue samples may be taken for toxicological testing.
Lastly, the ME looks for evidence of head trauma or skull fractures, and then he examines the brain. To do this he must open the skull. First, the scalp is incised from just behind one ear, over the top of the head, to just behind the other ear (see Figure 3-2). The scalp is then peeled forward, exposing the skull. A saw is used to remove a portion of the skull and expose the brain. He first examines the brain in situ (in place), then he removes it for a thorough inspection and to take tissue samples.
After each organ has been examined and samples have been taken for later microscopic examination, the organs are returned to the body and the incisions are sutured closed. The body might then be released to the family for burial, unless further examination is necessary for the investigation.
MICROSCOPIC EXAMINATION OF TISSUES: The removed tissue samples are “fixed” in a formalin solution and then imbedded in a block of paraffin. These paraffin blocks make slicing the specimen into very thin sections easier. The slices are placed on a glass slide and stained with biological stains such as hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for viewing under a microscope.
TOXICOLOGICAL EXAMINATIONS: Any collected body fluids and tissues are sent to the toxicology lab for drug and poison testing. Stomach contents and ocular fluid may reveal any drugs the victim ingested in the hours before death. Urine and bile may indicate what drugs the victim used during the past several days. Hair may show signs of chronic heavy metal (arsenic, mercury, and lead) ingestion. Blood is particularly useful for alcohol levels and for many other drugs. Urine can reveal barbiturates and other sedatives as well as marijuana and nicotine.
THE OFFICIAL AUTOPSY REPORT  
The final report consists of the anatomical and microscopic findings, along with attachments that contain the results of any ancillary tests, such as toxicological, serological, or DNA analyses. Using this information, the ME then offers his opinion as to the cause and manner of death (see Chapter Six).
The report may be filed immediately or may be delayed until all ancillary testing has returned. This may take days or weeks. At times, the ME may file a preliminary statement and await the return of these reports before filing his final report. Since his findings and opinions can affect the police, prosecutors, suspects, and families of all involved, the ME is typically cautious in both preliminary and final reporting.
Even his final report is not “written in stone” and can be altered at any time. If he uncovers evidence that changes his opinion, he can revise his opinion and the report. For example, if a chronically ill, elderly woman died in a nursing home and the cause of death appeared to be natural, the coroner could decide that an autopsy was not necessary and file his report stating that the manner of death was natural. But what if a large inheritance or insurance policy was at stake and someone came forward with evidence that suggested that the woman had been murdered? The coroner could exhume the body (if the burial had already occurred) and search more diligently for signs of injury or poisons. If he found trauma or toxins that could have caused the death, he could amend his report to state that the manner of death was not natural but homicide. A police investigation would then ensue.
Each pathologist has his own method and style of preparing the final report, but certain information must be included. A typical format would be:
• external examination 
• evidence of injury 
• central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) 
• internal examination of chest, abdomen, and pelvis 
• toxicological examinations 
• other laboratory tests 
• opinion  
The opinion includes his assessment of the cause, mechanism, and manner of death. 
