---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0021_split_001.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["prisoner", "inmate", "marshal", "federal", "prison", "officer", "transfer", "cell", "service", "jail", "leg", "one", "transport", "jet", "air", "center", "transportation", "sometimes", "handcuff", "day", "hundred", "trip", "iron", "plane", "female"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0021split001html

---


14
CON AIR: COFFEE, TEA, OR HANDCUFF KEY?It's never been part of my plan to be a guest of the federal prison system. Now I have an entirely new and totally compelling reason why.— S.J. ROZAN, EDGAR AWARD-WINNING AUTHOR OF IN THIS RAINThe day-to-day operations of law enforcement are apparent to everyone, but there's one major law enforcement operation the majority of the public doesn't know exists — it's the mass prisoner transit system operated by the Federal Bureau of Prisons and the U.S. Marshals Service.With today's federal prison population at a record high — just over 190,000 inmates locked away in more than 100 facilities — finding a place to house these men and women is indeed an increasing problem. In addition, getting those prisoners to their destinations and to and from court hearings is a massive undertaking that requires complex planning and the implementation of top security procedures.The federal prison system is quite a bit different than local prisons and jails. A federal inmate may commit a crime in Massachusetts but be incarcerated, for whatever reason, in another state as far away as California. During his stay in prison, the inmate may have to make several court appearances in the federal courthouse in Boston; therefore, the need to transport the felon comes into play. On any given day of the week, hundreds upon hundreds of inmates are transported to new destinations and to courts throughout the country.The long-distance transporting is done in unmarked passenger jets flown by the U.S. Marshals Service (this “airline” is unofficially known as Con Air). It's their job to ensure the safe transport of incarcerated men and women. The government jets take off and land at military bases or in remote landing strips inaccessible to the public. These clandestine departures and landings are done under the supervision of a heavily armed collection of officers from police agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Prisons, sheriff's deputies, city police officers, and special agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the U.S. Marshals Service. When these jets land, they're immediately surrounded by dozens of officers armed with high-powered rifles, shotguns, and fully automatic weapons.PREPARING THE PRISONERS FOR TRANSPORTA federal inmate begins his journey in the early morning. He's not told of his departure in advance so he can't make plans for escape. The prisoner is awakened around 3:00 A.M. and told to get dressed at once; he's not allowed to shower or eat breakfast. He's ordered to gather up all his belongings, including his mattress and pillow. His scant possessions are placed on the center of a mattress and rolled into a single bundle. In inmate culture, this is known as being “rolled up.” His belongings are placed into storage until his return. If the trip is a permanent transfer, his things will be boxed up (an inmate's possessions fit into a single cardboard box) and sent along with him.He's then taken to a holding cell to await the transportation team, a group of officers specifically assigned to transportation duties. Every morning, the transportation holding cells are filled beyond capacity as inmates from various sections of the prison are brought one by one to await departure. Each inmate is given special transport clothing — a pair of thin, elasticwaist khaki pants, a white T-shirt, a pair of blue canvas slip-on sneakers, and a pair of thin boxer shorts. officers reach into large boxes of clothing and hand whatever comes out to the prisoners. These items usually aren't the correct size — not even close — and the ill-fitting clothing sometimes gives the prisoners a comical appearance.The inmates huddle together, like cattle, in a holding cell that's ironically called a bullpen, which is an oversized cell with metal or wooden benches attached to the wall instead of a bed. The transport teams arrive and toss handcuffs, leg irons, and waist chains onto the floor in front of the bullpen. The sound of metal clanging can be heard echoing throughout the silence of the deserted hallways of the prison.A guard calls out names from a preprinted roster. Each inmate acknowledges his name by approaching the cell door. He holds his hands through a slot in the bars to allow his wrists to be handcuffed. Once the inmate is cuffed, he's brought out, strip-searched, and the shackling is completed by clamping leg irons (oversized handcuffs) to his ankles. A heavy chain is also placed around his waist that's attached to the handcuffs and leg irons. The waist chain reduces movement of the inmate's arms, feet, and hands. All inmates, regardless of their custody status, are restrained in the same manner.An additional device called a “black box” is locked over the handcuff chain of inmates who pose a high risk for transport security and safety. The black box was, ironically, designed by a former inmate. It totally eliminates hand movement and covers the keyholes on handcuffs. It's secured to the wrist and handcuffs with a separate heavy-duty padlock. The high-risk inmate is kept separate, usually in the front of the plane, from the lower-custody-status inmates for the duration of the trip.The shackled inmates are lined up single-file along a wall leading to a sally port, (a fenced-in, secure drive-through area for loading and unloading prisoners). Once all the prisoners are properly secured, a head count is taken and the prisoners are loaded into preassigned vans — men and women together.The hidden airports used by the U.S. Marshals Service can sometimes be several hours away from some prisons, making the journey extremely uncomfortable for all involved. During the trips, transportation officers make stops for coffee, donuts, meals, and bathroom breaks, but the inmates are usually forced to wait in the back of a van that's sometimes quite cold or scorching hot, depending on the season.AWAITING DEPARTUREArriving at the airstrip can be a shocking event for the inmates making this trip for the first time. At this point they still don't know where they're going or why, and to see the vast array of heavily armed officers with machine guns and shotguns can be extremely intimidating.While waiting for the incoming jets, officers nervously scan the horizon for any unusual activity and people, and their faces reflect the seriousness of the situation. At this moment during transport, the officers are quite vulnerable to a deadly escape attempt.The wait for the plane also can be unbearable for prisoners who haven't eaten or seen the inside of a restroom for nearly twelve hours. Gradually, more and more vans, buses, and police vehicles line the airfield beside the runway until finally an SUV, driven by a U.S. marshal, rolls onto the runway to alert everyone that the jet's about to land.Obvious anxiety washes across the faces of the police officers as the big passenger jet ambles down the runway until it rolls slowly to a stop in front of the idling police vehicles. The giant engines continue to snarl as a fuel truck fills the tanks and then moves away. The rear steps lower to the pavement, allowing a team of air marshals (the only officers allowed on the plane) to make their way down the steps amid the wind and roar of the turbines.The marshals wear light blue golf shirts displaying the U.S. Marshals Service logo, dark blue cargo-style pants, and military-style jump boots. They also wear earplugs to provide protection from the constant roar of the jet engines.BOARDING AND DEBOARDING THE PLANEThe air marshal in charge of the flight crew meets with the officer in charge on the ground for a moment, and then the process begins of exchanging prisoners already seated on the plane with the new inmates in the vehicles. This procedure is painstakingly carried out, one inmate at a time, until the one hundred and forty or so tattered and filthy plane seats are filled. The prisoners aren't allowed to talk or stand once they're on board, and using the restrooms isn't permitted unless they're directed to do so by a marshal. The inmates can't reach the ceiling air vents so they normally remain in their original positions.Officers on the plane issue each prisoner a brown paper bag containing food for what could possibly be a sixteen-hour day. Inside the bag are a four-ounce container of water, an apple, and two packages of peanut butter crackers. Sometimes a granola bar is tossed into the mix.When all is secure and every prisoner's accounted for, the marshals signal to the pilot that they're ready for takeoff. The jet then taxis down the runway to begin the long cross-country trek.Security is of the utmost importance for the transfer of this many prisoners at once, and rightfully so. Some of the inmates are the nation's worst criminals. Others are merely serving time for petty crimes, but they're all treated in the same manner. All are fully shackled.For the duration of this journey, the inmates are totally unaware of their location or their destinations. Nearly all the cross-country transferees know they may have an overnight layover in a small, rural county jail before they reach their final destination.THE TRANSFER CENTERThe jet crisscrosses its way across the nation unloading and loading prisoners at various destinations from California, to Las Vegas, to Salt Lake City, and to a remote airfield in Texas before it finally it touches down on a desolate airstrip outside of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, the location of the Federal Transfer Center.The transportation hub for the entire Federal Bureau of Prisons is typically the last stop of the day, and it's where any remaining prisoners will stay until the next plane headed to their final destination arrives. They could leave the next morning or, due to limited flights, they could be confined in the transfer center for months. They won't be told when they're scheduled to leave. That information is considered highly confidential.Upon arrival in Oklahoma, the jet briefly taxis along a deserted airstrip and parks near the solid, red brick façade of the prison facility. The prisoners stand and exit row by row and then through the front door of the plane, where they walk down an enclosed ramp flanked by U.S. marshals. The walk down the ramp is slow and laborious. The leg chains are short and only allow the prisoners to take a half-step at a time.After twelve hours of wearing the heavy leg irons, the prisoners' ankles are sore, imprinted with the pattern of the leg irons, and raw. Sometimes their ankles are left bleeding from the constant rubbing of metal against the thin flesh and bone. They wear socks, but the material is nearly paper-thin, and with weak elastic they work their way down during the course of the day, leaving the prisoner's ankles exposed to abuse from the hard steel. The agony caused by the handcuffs and leg irons is unavoidable. For the safety of all involved, inmates must remain safely restrained. Marshals normally do all they can to prevent any discomfort.Once the prisoners are inside the center, they're ordered to line up, single file, along a brightly lit corridor, where security personnel from the Federal Bureau of Prisons join the marshals to begin the transfer of custody. After a head count, the marshals start the line moving down the hallway. The inmates are still not allowed to speak. The only sounds heard are the clanking of chains on the highly polished tile floor and the occasional groan from a prisoner who's taken too large a step and pulled the leg iron chain tight, which causes the steel cuff to even dig deeper into his already tender ankle flesh.By now the hallway is filled with nearly one hundred and fifty inmates from all across the country, and several Federal Bureau of Prisons officers are standing ready to quell any situations that may arise. One by one, the prisoners are ordered to step onto a wooden platform where a marshal removes the leg irons. A second officer removes the cuffs and a third pats the inmate down and looks into his mouth and ears for contraband.The group must stand along the wall until each prisoner's shackles are removed. Then, they're all then led into a bullpen of a much larger capacity than those at local jails or prisons. The room is a rectangular, concrete box with little or no ventilation, no seating, and only one stainless steel toilet. The room could safely hold fifty to one hundred prisoners, but on busy transport day it can be filled with close to two hundred inmates. The prisoners stand elbow-to-elbow, hungry, tired, and desperately needing to use a restroom. The single toilet in the bullpen works on occasion but is still not enough to accommodate the crowd of prisoners (male and female prisoners are kept separate). Here in this room, under some pretty tough conditions, the prisoners must wait for hours as they're processed and assigned to sleeping quarters.After the processing is complete, the inmates are again strip-searched, a dozen at a time, by both male and female officers (female prisoners are strip-searched only by female officers). The prisoners are issued different ill-fitting clothing, and they're again inspected thoroughly for lice and contraband.INTERESTING CON AIR FACTSCon Air is actually the combined air fleet of the U.S. Marshals Service and the former U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, or INS. The INS has recently changed its name and is now called U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE. The merger of the U.S. Marshals Service and ICE created what's now known as Justice Prisoner and Alien Transportation System (JPATS).JPATS transports more than 270,000 prisoners each year.JPATS uses a fleet of commercial-type aircraft owned by the U.S.Marshals Service.JPATS' air fleet is based in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.The U.S. Marshals Service has been in service for more than two hundred years.U.S. marshals are responsible for all federal prisoners until the prisoners are either released or incarcerated.The U.S. Marshals Service houses approximately 47,000 prisoners per day.U.S. marshals provide daily security for more than two thousand federal judges.The Federal Bureau of Prisons has approximately thirty-five thousand employees.Inmates often requested transfers to Alcatraz because of the view and the privacy of the one-man cells.Then, the prisoners are finally divided into groups and led to various sections of the building called pods. Within the pods, the inmates are assigned to individual cells. The prison kitchen is often closed by the time the new prisoners arrive, so they're also given another brown paper bag containing another meager meal — an apple, two packages of peanut butter crackers, and a four-ounce container of water.It's normally around 8:00 P.M. when the prisoners are finally permitted into their cells and are allowed to rest, shower, and use a working toilet.The 9:00 P.M. hour causes fervor among the inmates, both male and female, as they rush from the day room to the individual cells along the rear wall of the pod. It's a long-standing tradition for the female inmates in the cells across the narrow courtyard to completely undress and perform as exotic dancers in front of their windows (each female's window lines up directly in front of a male inmate's window). This is the nightly event that makes the Oklahoma City Federal Transfer Center famous among the ranks of federal prisoners, nationwide. When the sun goes down in Oklahoma City, the lights come on, and it's showtime for the frenzied male inmates.Other than the receiving bullpen, the transfer center is kept spotlessly clean, and the in-house staff is very well trained. They treat the inmates with respect — call them sir and ma'am — and, in doing so, receive respect from their prisoners. There's very little trouble, if any, from the inmates. It's a well-oiled operation that serves pretty good food, except for the initial brown bag meal. Meals served at the transfer center are probably the best that many of the inmates will receive for years to come.For many of the prisoners, this is the most real meat they'll eat for the duration of their sentences. After leaving the transfer center, they'll more than likely be forced to sustain life on a diet of high carbohydrates and soy products. The transfer center provides a never-ending supply of personal hygiene products such as soap, shampoo, and deodorant. This, too, is something the prisoners won't see after leaving Oklahoma. They're not allowed to take any of these items with them when they leave. Most personal items are purchased by the inmates with money they receive from the outside or from the pay they receive from their prison job assignments.The inmates' stays at the transfer center are usually short. They can be held there for as little time as an overnight stopover to a period of two or three months, depending on the next flight that's going their way. Each trip also has to coincide with the appropriate ground transportation at the other end of the flight.On the day of the inmates' scheduled departure, they're awakened once again in the predawn hours and led to the bullpen to begin the next leg of the transport. This leg of the trip can sometimes be made by ground transport if the trip is only for a few hundred miles, or in instances where some of the more remote areas of the country have a lack of airports or runway space.GROUND TRANSPORTATIONInmates traveling by U.S. Marshals Service ground transportation make their journey in the back of an unmarked U.S. Marshals Service van. The windows are caged, and a heavy, steel padlock is placed on the outside of the doors. A welded-steel mesh separates the driver's compartment from the inmates in the rear. Male and female inmates are transported together in the back of these vans. The prisoners sometimes get an in-person, up-close look at the entertainers from the previous nighttime window shows.The marshals drive for up to eight hours at a time, stopping occasionally to drop off and pick up prisoners along the way. The final stop of the day, at the end of their shift, is at a county jail. The jail will hold the remaining prisoners overnight, until they get underway again the next morning. It's here, in the county jail, that many of the federal prisoners get their first taste of a real jail. These felons have been used to the two-person rooms or cubicles, TV rooms, libraries, tennis courts, and freedoms of prison recreation yards, not the twenty-four-hour-a-day lockdown of most overcrowded county jails.The inmates are booked into the jail as if they'd been arrested. They're fingerprinted, photographed, strip-searched, and — in some cases — deloused again. They're placed into a real jail cell, not a clean cubicle or room as they've been accustomed to in prison. The cells are dark, filthy, and sometimes infested with rats and roaches. The floors and walls are covered in graffiti, fecal matter, blood, and urine, and there's always hair or some unidentifiable substance matted into the dried body excretions and fluids.A stainless steel toilet and a concrete or steel bed are the only items in the cell, other than the inmates who've already been packed into the concrete enclosure. The door is solid steel with a 6″ × 8″ thick Plexiglas window to allow jail officers to view the activities of the prisoners. The new, incoming federal prisoners are given a thin army blanket and are forced to sleep on the floor, since the cell's already overcrowded with local inmates.State inmates regard federal prisoners as “higher ranking.” Their status as federal prisoners is easily identifiable by their government-issued, khaki-colored pants and their blue, deck-type shoes. The local inmates, out of respect for their superiors, offer them cigarettes, soft drinks, soups, and hygiene products. The federal prisoners gladly accept these items from their cellmates. The two groups swap legal war stories and comparisons of jails and prisons throughout the night.At dawn, the transportation process begins again. This procedure is repeated until the prisoners reach their final destinations. If an inmate is going to a court hearing, once the hearing is complete (sometimes after only a few minutes), the inmate must make the long journey back to the prison where she's serving her sentence. The return trip is the same, only in reverse. The entire round trip for a twenty-minute hearing can last up to three or four months and is very expensive, but necessary
