---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_029.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["document", "writing", "examiner", "ink", "letter", "page", "paper", "used", "may", "written", "word", "one", "signature", "handwriting", "forgery", "might", "also", "change", "person", "two", "forger", "often", "forensic", "pen", "make"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit029html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 18 
QUESTIONED DOCUMENTS: 
HANDWRITING AND  FORGERY EXAMINATION  
Documents lie at the heart of many criminal enterprises. An embezzler alters the company books to obscure his theft. A kidnapper sends a list of written demands. And an altered check, lottery ticket, or will can divert a large amount of money into the wrong hands. The analysis of these documents by the forensic document examiner can be key to solving these crimes.
As we have seen with most other forensic techniques, document examination dates back many more years than one might imagine. In 1609, François Demelle published the first scientific treatise on the subject in France. And in Germany, the 1810 chemical testing of the ink dye used in a document known as Konigin Hanschritt is believed to be the first use of document analysis in the legal arena.
The documents that come to the attention of the modern document examiner may be handwritten, typed, or photocopied, complete or fragmentary, or simply a signature. They can be letters, checks, wills, lottery or claim tickets, receipts, ledgers, ransom or hold-up notes, harassing letters, driver’s licenses, contracts, or deeds. They can be counterfeited currency or stamps. They might even include writings and symbols scrawled on walls, doors, or any other object.
The term questioned document is applied to any document whose source or authenticity is in question. When criminal investigators come across such documents, the forensic document examiner will be asked to:
• determine if a document is authentic and was produced by the person and at the time it was purported to be 
• determine if the document has been altered 
• expose damaged or obliterated writing 
• compare handwriting, personal signatures, and typewritten or photocopied documents 
• determine the age and source of papers and inks  
To tackle these tasks, the examiner uses all of his skills and experience as well as several microscopic, photographic, and chemical techniques. This is an exacting art that can’t be completely covered in this book, but hopefully by the time you finish reading this chapter you will have a feel for the many unique duties and talents of the forensic document examiner.
HANDWRITING  
No two people write alike. There may be similarities, but on close inspection, the writing varies. Each person’s writing style is personal, unique, and results from unconscious, automatic actions. Also, people never write the same way twice. Don’t believe me? Quickly write your own signature a dozen times and take a close look at them. Each is a little different, isn’t it?
Now repeat this experiment while holding the paper up against a wall or while standing over a table. Try using different types of writing instruments. What do you see? There will be even greater differences between these and the original signatures. The reason is that our handwriting is not only different each time but is also affected by our position and by whether we use a pen, pencil, or crayon.
These and many other variables create problems for the document examiner, and he must take all of them into consideration.
Let me make one other thing clear up front. When a forensic document expert examines handwriting, he is concerned only with the physical characteristics of the writing. He does not attempt to determine the writer’s personality type. This is the job of a graphologist, and graphology is not an accepted forensic science.
LEARNING TO WRITE 
Each of us has a personal and individual writing style that develops over years. We all learned to write early in life and in basically the same way. In fact, in the United States, only two basic writing systems are used: the Palmer system, introduced in 1880, and the Zaner-Blosser system, which first appeared in 1895.
People are first taught to print and later to write in script, invariably beginning with the alphabet. They learn to copy each letter in both upper and lower case, and then progress to words and how to print and write them. Early in this educational process many people possess very similar styles because the system teaches everyone to form letters in the same way. This lends certain shared class characteristics to writing. But with time and repetition, a style and flow to a person’s writing appears, so that each person develops his own style—a personal signature, so to speak. These personal characteristics become individual characteristics to the eye of the document examiner and are the basis for handwriting identification and comparison.
The point is that writing is a slowly progressive learning experience. Lettering goes from big block letters to flowing script only after years of practice. It is not until the late teens that a person’s penmanship becomes unique, ingrained, and individual. After that, handwriting style changes little. But it does change and certain conditions may alter it dramatically.
As a person ages, his style undergoes a slow, steady metamorphosis. Not dramatic, but enough to recognize. This is important when comparing older documents, since new samples of the author’s handwriting might differ from what he wrote twenty years earlier. If he has suffered some illness, such as a stroke or Parkinson’s disease, these changes may be significant. Fatigue, stress, impaired vision, hand or arm injuries, an awkward writing position, and intoxication with drugs or alcohol can also alter the person’s handwriting. The examiner must be cognizant of all these variables.
HANDWRITING COMPARISON 
When comparing two documents or signatures to determine their authenticity, the examiner must have at his disposal examples (called exemplars or standards) of the person’s writing that he knows are authentic. That is, if he wants to determine if a certain person wrote a certain questioned letter, he needs samples of that person’s writing as a basis for comparison. And since a person’s writing is a little different each time he puts pen to paper, the more examples the examiner has the better; he must get a good grasp of the individual characteristics and the range of variation that appears in the writing if he is to make an adequate comparison.
To begin his comparison, he looks for points of similarity and points of difference between the known standards and the questioned document. He will assess such things as:
OVERALL FORM: This includes the size, shape, slant (right, left, or vertical), proportion (relative height), and the beginning and ending strokes of the letters. Does the writing slant one way or the other, or employ angles, loops, or curves to make various letters? How do the individual letters begin and end?
LINE FEATURES: These deal with writing speed and fluidity, the amount of pen pressure applied, the spacing of the letters and words, and how the letters are connected. Does the writing flow or is it broken and hesitant? Is it written firmly or lightly? Are the letters and words crowded or spread out? Are the words written in a single smooth line or was the pen lifted in the middle of certain words?
MARGINS AND FORMAT: This is the overall layout of the writing. Are the page margins wide or narrow? Are the written lines parallel with each other and the top of the page, or do some show a rising or falling slant?
CONTENT: Grammar, punctuation, and word choice are part of the comparison. Are there consistent mistakes in spelling and punctuation? Do certain phrases and grammatical constructions repeat? Does the writing reveal the author’s ethnicity or educational level?
If the examiner has a sufficient number of standards, he can usually determine if the questioned document and the standard share the same authorship. Problems arise if he has only a few examples. These may not be sufficient for him to get a “feel” for the person’s writing style. Another problem is that the standards may have been written using a different instrument and under different circumstances. For example, comparing a questioned letter to a known writing on a wall might be impossible. If no usable known standards are available, the examiner may request the person to write something on similar paper and with a similar instrument.
This brings up the concept of requested and nonrequested standards. Non-requested standards are documents or signatures of known authorship. Requested standards are writings or signatures a person produces at the request of the examiner.
For example, the examiner might be asked to determine if a check is forged. Besides the signature on the questioned check, he needs a copy of the real account holder’s signature. Such nonrequested standards can usually be obtained from the bank. Or the examiner may simply ask the suspected forger to write his signature (actually the signature on the check, which he claims is his) several times. These requested standards are written on the same type of paper and with a similar writing instrument as those used on the check in question.
Nonrequested writings have several advantages, most importantly that they reveal the writer’s true writing habits. They also often contain words and phrases that the writer frequently uses, which can be strong evidence against him. For example, old letters or notes may contain phrases that are identical to those used in a ransom note. The major disadvantage of these non-requested standards is that they must themselves be authenticated. If they can’t be, they are of little value to the examiner.
Another problem with nonrequested standards is that everyone’s handwriting can change as a result of aging, certain medical conditions, and a host of other reasons that I mentioned earlier. For this reason, the examiner attempts to obtain documents written by the suspected author that were written around the same time as the questioned document. For example, if he is asked to authenticate a twenty-year-old handwritten will, he would want documents written by the purported author twenty years ago. These would reflect his style at the time the will was prepared much better than more recently written documents.
The major advantage of requested writings is that their authenticity is unquestioned—the examiner can actually watch the person write. Another advantage is that the examiner can dictate exactly what he wants written, such as words or phrases from the questioned document. This allows him to compare the writing word for word. If the content of the document contains information that he wants to withhold from the suspect or that is sensitive to the ongoing investigation, he can ask that he write sentences that are quite different but that include many of the words and phrases used in the questioned document.
A major disadvantage of requested writings, though, is that this situation makes some people nervous or causes them to concentrate too much on the writing process, which can lead to changes in their “normal” signature and introduce minor changes that make an accurate comparison more difficult.
Also, the person might attempt to purposefully disguise his writing style. For example, let’s suppose the questioned document is a ransom or extortion note or a threatening letter. Obviously, if the suspect is the author of the note, he does not want his handwriting to match that of the document and would attempt to disguise his handwriting. Sometimes such efforts are successful and a match can be difficult or impossible.
One way around this is to have the suspect write a great deal of material. Not just a page, but several pages. It might be easy for him to alter his style for short passages, but the more he writes the more his natural style will come through. Another trick is to dictate the same material to the writer several times. If he is attempting to disguise his handwriting style, he will likely use different devices with each attempt. Basically, he forgets what he did in the last draft so he must make up changes “on the fly.” A good examiner can then find the hidden style elements and the devices used to disguise them within the requested writing and make a comparison.
But what if a suspected forger refuses to give a sample of his writing? Can’t he plead that it violates his Fifth Amendment right not to incriminate or testify against himself? The short answer is no. The Supreme Court decided in Gilbert v. California that handwriting was part of identifying physical characteristics and was not under the protection of the Fifth Amendment. Further, in the case of the United States v. Mara, the court also decided that this did not violate the Fourth Amendment protection against unreasonable search and seizure. This means that the court can order the suspect to produce handwriting standards even if he refuses.
Once he has either requested or nonrequested standards in hand, the examiner places the known and questioned documents side by side and visually inspect the writing. He first looks for gross likenesses or differences. If he finds significant differences, the comparison can end and he can state that the two documents were not written by the same person.
The most evident gross feature of script is the slant. Taller letters such as Ts and Ls most readily display the slant of a person’s writing. These letters may lean right, left, or remain fairly vertical. Other common distinguishing features are the size and shading of the letters, the spacing between letters and words, and the relative height of letters.
If these gross characteristics are similar, he proceeds to evaluate more subtle characteristics, such as the beginning and ending strokes of certain letters. These include such things as broad, looped terminal strokes and ending flourishes. For example, the tail of letters, such as y or j, may be straight, angled, hooked, or looped.
He then addresses such things as pen pressure, writing speed, and pen lifts. Pen lifts are simply the lifting of the pen from the paper during writing. Some people write words without breaking contact with the paper, while others lift the pen and write in a noncontinuous fashion. These motions are ingrained and repetitive and are difficult to disguise.
No single feature makes an accurate comparison, but a combination of features might allow the examiner to determine that the writings came from the same person. This is obviously a very subjective judgment. Based on his findings, the examiner might say that the documents absolutely match, match with a high probability, probably match, or do not match, or his evaluation is inconclusive and he can’t say one way or the other.
If the writing in question is script or a signature, a trained examiner can usually determine if a particular individual created it. If the questioned document is printed, this task is much more difficult since many of the distinguishing features of writing are not present in printed text.
Fortunately for law enforcement, most criminals are not very smart. This is often evident in written documents where misspellings are common. When the suspected writer of a forged document or a ransom note is asked to produce a requested sample for comparison, the examiner asks him to use the same words that were misspelled in the note. More often than not, the suspect, if he is the author of the note, misspells the words in the same fashion. He doesn’t know how to spell the word so he doesn’t know he did anything wrong.
In the infamous Charles Manson murders in 1969, the words “Healter Skelter” were written in blood on a refrigerator door at the LaBianca crime scene. It was apparently a misspelling of the title of the Beatles song “Helter Skelter” from their famous White Album. The incorrect spelling was used in the trial of Manson and his followers, who were convicted of the murders.
As we saw with fingerprints, ballistic patterns, and DNA databases, several handwriting databases also exist. The FBI maintains the National Fraudulent Check Center, the Bank Robbery Note File, the Anonymous Letter File, and the Forensic Information System for Handwriting (FISH), which contains scanned and digitized documents. A questioned document can be compared with these reference files, and if a match is made, a forensic document examiner can make a visual confirmation.
FORGERY  
Forgery is legal terminology, not a forensic determination. It is defined as the writing or alteration of a document with the “intent to defraud.” The document examiner can determine if a document was written by someone other than the stated author or if the document has been altered in any way, but the “intent to defraud” is decided by a judge and jury.
Criminal investigations often involve forged documents, such as handwritten wills and contracts or signatures on checks, wills, and contracts. Even ransom notes and threatening letters are forged in the hopes of casting suspicion on someone else. Since forged writing is not natural, even the most careful and gifted forger leaves behind evidence of his efforts.
The two most common methods of forgery are freehand simulation and tracing. Freehand methods are simply an attempt to copy the signature, while tracing involves placing the document over the original signature and tracing its lines. Either technique leaves clues that result from the forger writing in a manner that feels unnatural to him.
Common clues to forged writing include:
PRIOR DRAWING: The forger often uses a pencil to lightly trace a signature and then go back and write over the traced signature with ink.
FORGER’S TREMOR: This is a very fine shakiness to the writing from the forger’s attempts to make an exact copy.
UNEVEN SPEED AND PRESSURE: Careful writing and tracing are not smooth and flowing as is natural writing. The forger uses varying speeds and pen pressures as he carefully creates each letter.
HESITATIONS: These are very common and result from the writer’s starting and stopping frequently in his efforts to be exact.
UNUSUAL PEN LIFTS: Since copying and tracing are tedious, the forger frequently lifts the pen from the page to check his work.
PATCHING AND RETOUCHING: Mistakes are common in this tedious writing. The forger must continually add, remove, and repair marks.
BLUNT BEGINNINGS AND ENDS: Beginning and ending strokes of almost anyone’s natural writing are very difficult to duplicate, so forged words are often relatively blunt on both ends.
To the naked eye, many of these defects may pass unnoticed, but under magnification with either a simple magnifying glass or a microscope, they are easily seen. In the case of prior drawing, a microscopic examination of the writing often shows both the pencil and the ink lines. The examiner may also use infrared light in this situation, since some inks become transparent under infrared light but graphite from the pencil will not. This means that the pencil lines can be seen beneath the ink.
DISGUISED WRITING 
A special form of forgery is disguised writing. In this situation, the forger attempts to change or disguise his own writing. Many ransom notes and threatening letters are written this way so that the author can deny ownership at a later date. Alternatively, a suspect might attempt to disguise his writing when confronted with an incriminating letter that he wrote in his natural handwriting. He may change the size, slant, and form of some letters. But, despite his best efforts, much of his own writing style slips through. Certain letter formations, slants, or flourishes sneak into the script without the forger noticing. It is very difficult to hide these ingrained writing motions and an expert examiner can often find them.
ALTERED DOCUMENTS 
Forgers often attempt to remove, add, or change portions of a written document for a wide variety of reasons, including financial gain or creation of an alibi. It might be as simple as changing a date or as complex as attempting to erase and rewrite a portion of the document or a signature. Perhaps a change in the date or dollar amount on a contract or check will bring a financial windfall. Maybe the gain of money or property will follow the addition of one name and the removal of another from a will. Or a signature on a sign-in sheet may provide an alibi. These changes are called erasures, obliterations, and alterations.
Erasures are common and easily accomplished with a rubber eraser, a knifepoint or other sharp instrument, sandpaper, or even a fingernail— anything that will scrape or rub away the unwanted marks. Fortunately, most of these are readily visible with the naked eye, often with the use of oblique (angled) light, which reveals the imperfections left on the paper or the indented remnants of erased writing. If not, the examiner can use a magnifying glass or microscope with oblique lighting to expose the erasures.
If a rubber eraser was used, tiny fragments of the eraser and the ink nestle into the fibers of the paper. With ultraviolet or infrared light, these may fluoresce (glow) and become visible. Also, dusting the page with lycopodium powder, which clings to and exposes the tiny rubber particles that invariably remain, can help.
Exposing erasures is important because even if the original words or marks can’t be visualized, the examiner at least knows that the document was altered. This alone may be proof of a crime and make many legal documents null and void.
Obliteration is a bit more aggressive than simple erasing, which is not needed if the person simply obliterates or severely damages the paper that the words or signature is written on. Fire is most often the chosen method. Once the paper is burned, the writing is lost forever, right? Not exactly. If the paper is charred but intact, reflecting light at various angles off the paper’s surface may expose the contrast between the ink and the charred paper background. The page can then be photographed.
Of course, handling charred pages is very difficult as they are extremely fragile and easily crumble. One way around this is to spray them with a solution of polyvinyl acetate in acetone. This stiffens the paper and makes handling much easier. The pages can then be floated on a solution of alcohol, chloral hydrate, and glycerin and photographed, sometimes using infrared light. Alternatively, a form of autoradiography can be used. In this technique the pages are sandwiched between two photographic plates and placed in a dark room for two weeks. The plates can then be developed and often the writing is revealed.
Sometimes chemicals such as oxidizing or bleaching agents are used to remove writing. These chemicals react with ink to produce a colorless compound and the writing disappears. But, under a microscope, the examiner can see remnants of the ink as well as discoloration of the paper in the area of treatment.
A more modern method of obliterating writing is by use of a laser, which vaporizes the ink. It also burns the paper fibers in the area and these can be seen under a microscope.
Alterations are used when a simple obliteration of words isn’t enough. The forger needs to replace the obliterated words or numbers with others. Common examples are changing the amount of a check or the date on a contract or will. If the writing is obliterated before other writing is added, the examiner sees the above-mentioned changes in the underlying paper. He then analyzes the new writing and compares it to the old for differences in technique.
If the forgery is exceptionally well done and simple inspection doesn’t reveal the changes, the examiner uses a microscope to expose the small differences in the original and the altered portions of the writing. He might also see subtle changes in ink color, line thickness, double lines, and pen pressure. If a ballpoint or roller ball pen was used, defects in the ball of either may be seen. One pen may have a very smooth, flawless ball, while the other may have an uneven or defective ball that leaves behind gaps and imperfections in the written line. The same is true for pencil leads and fountain pen nibs.
Overwriting is another form of alteration. Instead of erasing anything, the forger adds to or overwrites a portion of a document. Maybe change a 4 to an 8 or add a zero or two to a check. If the forger uses the same ink as the original writer, these types of changes can be extremely difficult to uncover. But, most often the forger does not have access to the pen or the ink used for the original writing and must make do with one of similar color. A careful examination of the inks used most often reveals the areas of alteration.
Though the two inks might seem identical under normal light, they usually appear very different when exposed to ultraviolet (UV) or infrared light. Depending upon the chemical makeup of the inks, UV light may cause them to fluoresce, fade from view, or appear unchanged. Each ink reacts differently, so one may fluoresce and the other fade from view, thus revealing that two different inks were used. Infrared light is invisible to the unaided eye, so it is usually coupled with photography to capture the image of the writing. Infrared photography, which is basically photographing the page under a blue-green light with infrared-sensitive film, often can distinguish the two inks very clearly. If these light techniques don’t help, it may be necessary to examine the chemical contents of the inks to show that they are indeed different.
Indented Writing 
Whenever something is written on a pad and the written page is removed, the remaining second page is indented by the path of the pen over the removed page. If the side of a pencil lead is then rubbed back and forth over the surface of the page, the “invisible” writing appears. This indented writing is also called second page writing. Of course, the forensic document examiners would never use this pencil method, since the pencil’s markings could destroy or damage the evidence.
Sometimes a simple angled light exposes indented writing, and when it does, the page can be photographed. A more sensitive method is the use of an electrostatic detection apparatus (ESDA), which was developed by Foster & Freeman USA, Inc. in 1978. It can, on occasion, uncover indented writing several pages below the original page. It’s interesting that no one knows exactly how ESDA works, only that it does.
In ESDA, the page in question is covered with a Mylar sheet and placed on a porous metal plate. A vacuum is applied, which pulls the Mylar tightly against the page. The Mylar is used to protect the page, which is potential evidence, against damage. Static electricity is produced in the Mylar sheet-page combination by passing an electric wand over them. Though this process charges the entire surface of the Mylar, the charge is greatest in the indentions. Black toner similar to that used in copy machines is poured or sprayed over the Mylar. It attaches to the surface in proportion to the degree of charge, which means the indentions retain the greatest concentration of the toner. This reveals the indentions and thus the writing. It can then be photographed and preserved, and the original page (the real evidence) has not been damaged or altered in any way.
Paper and Ink 
Sometimes the forensic document examiner must determine if a document has had pages added or if it was actually created at a certain time. To do this, he may resort to analysis of the document’s paper or ink. If the pages of a document are of different types of paper, it might mean that pages have been added or exchanged. Or if the paper or ink was not manufactured until after the purported date of the document, something is amiss.
Most paper is made of wood or cotton and often has chemical additives that affect its opacity, color, brightness, strength, and durability. During the manufacturing process, coatings, fillers, and sizings are added. Coatings improve the appearance and surface properties of the paper, some making the paper better for copiers or printers, others better for writing. Fillers add color, strength, and surface texture. Common ones include titanium oxide and calcium carbonate. Sizings make the surface less porous to ink, so writing and printing will be sharp and clear. The types and amounts of each of these vary among manufacturers and paper types; chemical testing can distinguish one type and manufacturer from another.
Let’s say the examiner is asked if each page of a will, contract, or other multipage document was created at the same time. That is, were pages added to it at a later date? By analyzing the chemical content of each page, he can determine if they are all the same type and from the same manufacturer, and he might even be able to distinguish among various lots of paper.
He also looks for watermarks, which are translucent designs in the paper that can be seen by holding the page up to a light. These usually indicate the manufacturer, the date of its production, and often for whom the paper was made. Attempts to forge a watermark are usually easily spotted. The reason is that a true watermark has fewer fibers than the rest of the page. This is what makes it visible when held up to a light. Forged marks are added images, and thus have an underlying fiber density equal to the rest of the page.
Paper analysis played a key role in revealing that diaries purported to have been written by Adolf Hitler were modern forgeries.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE HITLER DIARIES 
On February 18, 1981, Gerd Heidemann, an employee of German publisher Gruner + Jahr, claimed to have found some lost diaries of Adolf Hitler. He said he had received the documents, which were handwritten in almost illegible German script, from a wealthy collector whose brother was an East German general. Heidemann’s boss, Manfred Fischer, agreed to purchase the twenty-seven-volume diary along with a previously unknown third volume of Mein Kampf for 200,000 marks.
Fischer then began the authentication process by sending portions of the documents along with samples of Hitler’s handwriting to Dr. Max Frei-Sulzer of the Zurich police forensic department and to Ordway Hilton, a world-renowned document examiner in Landrum, South Carolina. Unfortunately, neither Dr. Frei-Sulzer nor Hilton were aware that the handwriting samples came from the same source as the diaries themselves, so as expected, both men determined that the writings were from the same hand and, therefore, the documents were authentic.
Bantam Books, Newsweek, and publisher Rupert Murdoch entered into a bidding war for worldwide publication rights. Murdoch flew in Hugh Trevor-Roper, a renowned British historian, who, working under the same deception as Frei-Sulzer and Hilton, reached a similar conclusion. Newsweek ultimately won the bidding for the price of $3.75 million.
Fortunately, at the request of Gruner + Jahr, the West German police forensic department conducted their own examination and discovered that the paper on which the diaries were written contained Blankophor, a whitener that did not exist until 1954. In addition, the bindings contained threads of viscose and polyester, neither of which existed in the 1940s. Further, none of the inks used were widely available during World War II, and finally, a measurement of chlorine evaporation from the ink revealed that the documents were less than a year old.
Sometimes the key to determining authenticity lies in the ink used. Inks that appear the same physically may be very different chemically. This can help the examiner determine if the same ink was used for each page or word of a document, and can also reveal whether a particular ink existed at the time the document was supposedly prepared. For example, the ballpoint pen was first publicly marketed in 1945, so a document prepared with this type of instrument could not be older than that.
One nondestructive method for ink comparison is microspectrophotometry (see the appendix). This allows the examiner to accurately determine if the colors of the two inks match. If they do, it is likely they came from the same batch.
Another comparison method is thin layer chromotography (TLC) (see the appendix). For this test, very small samples of the inked paper are punched from the written lines using a thin hollow needle. The tiny piece of paper is placed in a test tube, and a solvent, which dissolves the ink, is added. A drop of the solvent solution, which now carries the ink, is placed on a paper strip along with drops of several known control inks. The strip is dried and then placed into another solvent, which migrates up the paper strip, dragging the inks along with it. The distance each of the inks migrates along the strip is determined by the size of its molecules, which separates the inks into bands. If inks from two pages of a questioned document are tested in this fashion, and if they yield different bands, the writing on the two pages was done with two distinctly different inks.
The examiner also has several ink reference databases at his disposal, such as the Ink Library, which is part of the United States Secret Service Forensic Services Division’s Questioned Document Branch. In addition, the U.S. Treasury Department maintains an extensive database of the TLC patterns of commercial inks. More recently, many manufacturers have begun adding fluorescent dye “tags” to their products so that they can be more easily identified. Since the tags change annually, the year of manufacture can be readily determined.
Even with all these sophisticated techniques available to the forensic document examiner, some forgery cases are very difficult to unravel. Just how clever experienced forgers can be is illustrated in the Mormon Forgeries case.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE MORMON FORGERIES 
On October 15, 1985, in Salt Lake City, Utah, two pipe bombs exploded, one killing businessman and Mormon bishop Steve Christensen and the other grandmother Kathy Sheets. The package that killed Mrs. Sheets was addressed to her husband, Gary, also a bishop in the Mormon Church. The next day a third bomb exploded in the car of Mark Hofmann, a young man who dealt with historical documents. Hofmann survived and told police that he had seen a strange package sitting in his car, and when he reached for it, it exploded. Bomb investigators knew immediately that Hofmann was lying since crime scene reconstruction evidence indicated that Hofmann had been kneeling in the car seat, working with the bomb when it detonated. Hofmann became the lead suspect in the other bombings, since it was felt that he was likely preparing a third bomb for delivery when it accidentally went off.
Police soon learned that Hofmann was somewhat of a whiz at locating ancient documents. In fact, he had recently discovered not one but two copies of the Oath of a Freeman, a seventeenth-century work that was the first document ever printed in America. Amazingly, prior to Hofmann’s discoveries, no copies were known to exist. He had also found what became known as the “White Salamander Letter,” a document that undermined the very tenets of Mormonism and greatly embarrassed the church. The police discovered that Hofmann had sold many historical documents to the Mormon Church. However, they also uncovered evidence that these documents were forgeries. Did Hofmann plant the bombs in an attempt to cover his forgeries?
The case became long and complex, but ended when Hofmann was confronted with evidence that proved he had forged his “discoveries.” Hofmann confessed to the bombings and the forgeries in exchange for a life sentence rather than face a possible death sentence in court. He also told investigators how he pulled off the forgeries, which were so realistic that many experts had deemed them authentic.
The original Oath of a Freeman had been printed by Stephen Daye, who also printed the Bay Psalm Book. Hofmann purchased a cheap copy of this book, cut out the letters, and rearranged them into Oath of a Freeman. He then used this model to create a printing plate, which he used to print the two copies of the Oath. He added wear patterns to the letters, to simulate the changes that would be seen with repeated use in a real printing press, by grinding down portions of some letters and rubbing the entire plate with steel wool. This gave the printed document realistic printing defects.
But for the documents to stand up to the rigorous scrutiny that he knew would follow, he needed to “age” the paper and the ink he used. The paper was the easy part. He simply used paper pilfered from the flyleaves of other seventeenth-century books in the Brigham Young University library. He even burned one of these pages to produce the carbon black he needed to make the “ancient” printing ink he needed. He did this because he feared the examination of his discoveries might include carbon-14 dating of the ink. If it came from seventeenth-century paper, the C-14 dating would reflect this. He mixed the carbon black with linseed oil, beeswax, and tannic acid, which he obtained by boiling a seventeenth-century leather book binding in distilled water. Through this process he produced “old” ink. But, ink oxidizes with age and turns from dark black to a rusty hue. To simulate this effect, Hofmann used a combination of peroxide (an oxidizing agent) and a hand iron, which added heat and sped up the process. All these precautions meant that if the ink were visually and chemically tested, it would appear as if it had been prepared in the seventeenth century.
But, the prosecutors who handled the bombing-murder case brought in forensics document examiners George J. Throckmorton and William Flynn, and they proved to be Hofmann’s undoing. After examining the documents, they discovered several things wrong. Letters with “tails” such as Y and J seemed to overlap with taller letters such as L and T, when the former appeared in the line above the latter. This overlapping was a product of Hofmann’s pasting together of the letters when he made the template for his press and would not be possible with the handset type used in the seventeenth century. In handset type each letter is a raised figure on a small cube and the cubes are lined up on a page-sized holder in the proper order to produce the words and sentences, line by line, down the page. This means that each letter is “within” the area of its cube and overlapping is not possible.
They also noted evidence of scorching on the paper and ink from the hand iron and what is called the “alligator effect.” This is the cracking and breaking of the ink from the use of chemical oxidants to artificially “age” the ink. Natural aging doesn’t produce such changes. They found many other problems with the documents, and at the end of the day, the very clever Hofmann failed to deceive the even more clever document examiners.
Typewriters and Photocopiers 
Typewriters are frequently used to write threatening letters and ransom and extortion notes, since criminals believe this will make the letter untraceable. Not true. When a typewriter is involved, the two most common questions asked of the document examiner are:
• What make and model typewriter produced the document?
• Was the document prepared using this particular suspect’s typewriter? 
The answer to the first question relies on class characteristics, while the answer to the latter requires the identifying of individual characteristics.
To identify the make and model, the examiner must have a database of typefaces used in various models, both old and new. Most manufacturers use either pica or elite typefaces, but the size, shape, and style of the letters vary so that a particular manufacturer can be identified. This alone narrows the search for the exact machine that produced the document.
In order for the examiner to determine if a particular machine produced the questioned document, he searches for individual characteristics of the typewriter. These include misaligned or damaged letters, abnormal spacing before or after certain letters, and variations in the pressure applied to the page by some letters. For example, a certain letter can have nicks or spurs that would be imprinted on the page, or a letter could lean to one side or be slightly higher or lower than the others. These defects can be compared to a suspect typewriter and offer powerful individualizing characteristics.
This type of comparison was a critical part of the famous Leopold and Loeb case of 1924.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: LEOPOLD AND LOEB 
Nathan Leopold and Richard Loeb were new kinds of killers—“thrill killers.” On May 21, 1924, nineteen-year-old Leopold and eighteen-year-old Loeb murdered classmate Bobby Franks with a chisel to see what it felt like to kill someone and to see if they could get away with it. Even though Franks was dead, they sent a ransom note as part of their attempts to deflect the investigation. Unfortunately for them, Leopold left his glasses at the crime scene. The spectacles had an unusual hinge, which allowed police to trace them to a Chicago optometrist who said he had written only three similar prescriptions, one to Nathan Leopold. The investigation ultimately led to a match between the ransom note and a typewriter Leopold used in his law study group. Despite the efforts of famous defense attorney Clarence Darrow, the two boys were convicted and sentenced to life in prison.
One problem with typewriter comparison arises with the IBM Selectric typewriter. This model has an interchangeable type-head sphere. This means that the typewriter must have the same sphere that was used to prepare the document in place at the time of the examination. Obviously, if the sphere has been replaced and the original discarded, no match can be made.
In typewriters that use ribbons, the examiner might be able to use this to link the typewriter to the document. If the typewriter possesses a single-pass ribbon and if the ribbon used to type the document is still in place, the message can simply be read from the ribbon itself. But, even if the ribbon has been used in several passes, portions of the message might be retrievable. There is one caveat with typewriters that use ribbons, however: In order to compare a typed document to a particular machine, the examiner must prepare a comparison document by using the machine to type it. When he does this, he must use a similar ribbon and it must be in a similar condition. The reason for this is that a worn or lightly inked ribbon will reveal minor defects in the typeface, whereas a heavily inked, new ribbon might obscure them.
What if the original typewriter was used to add a line or a paragraph to a document? How would the examiner know that this had occurred? Since the typeface would be identical, it’s possible that he couldn’t uncover the alteration. But, when a page is placed into a typewriter a second time, its alignment is often slightly off. This might be very subtle, but the examiner has a way around that. He places a specially made glass plate that possesses an etched grid pattern over the page. Any imperfection in the alignment of the added lines or paragraphs may then be readily visible.
Unfortunately, typewriters have given way to computers, which connect to printers that may use daisy wheel, dot matrix, ink-jet, or laser technologies. These vary very little so that the examiner can’t often distinguish one from another. If the suspect printer is available, the examiner may find subtle changes in how it jets and lasers certain letters. This is more difficult and less often possible than matching a typewriter to a document.
At times, a photocopied document can be matched to a particular copy machine. A copy machine takes an image on a page and duplicates it onto another. It does this by a complex series of events. First, a lens focuses the image of the page onto a drum, which has been charged with static electricity and coated with selenium or another light-sensitive substance. The drum retains the image as it is bathed with a toner that attaches to the surface of the drum in proportion to the strength of the electrostatic charge. This toner image is then transferred to the blank page, which is then exposed to a fixing agent.
The mechanisms within the machine that pull the paper onto and remove it from the copy surface can leave marks on the page, or the cover glass, camera lens, or drum might have scratches or defects that mark each page produced. Occasionally, these marks can be identified and matched to the machine that produced the page in question.
ART FORGERY  
Art forgers are a special breed. They need to be smart, meticulous, and talented. After all, if you are going to copy a master, you’d better know how to handle a brush. Yet, the methods to uncover their forgeries are similar to those employed by document examiners. The creation of Christ With the Adultress, purported to have been done by Dutch painter Johannes Vermeer in the 1600s, is an example of just how clever art forgers can be.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE VERMEER FORGERIES 
Prior to and throughout World War II, the Nazis purchased and stole art from all over Europe and Russia. Many of the works were secreted within bunkers, caves, and mines during the war. After the war ended, a cache of such paintings was uncovered in an Austrian salt mine and among them was a work titled Christ With the Adultress, which appeared to be a previously unknown work by Johannes Vermeer. An investigation traced the painting to Han van Meegeren, another Dutch painter. Since he had sold the piece to the Nazis, he was arrested as a collaborator.
Van Meegeren confessed that the work was a forgery, but authorities didn’t believe him until, while under house arrest, he produced other astonishing forgeries. He then told investigators that his original intention was to create fakes, trick art experts, and then expose their ignorance. He apparently had created many such forgeries during the run-up to World War II. He deviated from his original plan when he found he could sell the works for a good deal of money to the Nazis.
So, how did he create fake works that fooled the experts? First, he needed canvases from the seventeenth century, the period in which Vermeer painted. He purchased lesser works of that time period and, using pumice, removed most of the original art. He then ground his own pigments, much as did Vermeer and other painters of the time. But he couldn’t simply add his pigments to conventional oils like linseed oil, as these require many years to completely dry and crack, as would be the case in a painting that was truly three hundred years old. He instead used a synthetic phenol-formaldehyde resin (known as Albertol or Ambertol), which dried and hardened quickly. Using this mixture, he created his paintings and then dried them in an oven at 105°F for an hour. After a coat of varnish, he rolled the canvas over a drum to “crack” the paint. Ink was then spread over the painting and allowed to seep into the cracks to “age” them. After a second coat of varnish, the painting was ready for viewing.
Examiners then analyzed this painting and many others that van Meegeren had produced over the years to ascertain if he was truthful about his methods. Chemical analysis showed that phenol-formaldehyde resin was indeed present and that a blue pigment used in some of the paintings was not available until the nineteenth century. X-rays revealed remnants of the original underlying paintings on the canvases he had used. Christ With the Adultress was indeed a 1930s forgery.
