---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_027.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["bullet", "gun", "weapon", "casing", "shell", "crime", "fired", "two", "firearm", "examiner", "barrel", "type", "scene", "case", "firing", "also", "found", "victim", "shot", "distance", "one", "caliber", "match", "pattern", "ammunition"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit027html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 16 
FIREARMS 
EXAMINATION:
MORE THAN GUNS AND AMMUNITION  
This area of forensic investigation is popularly called ballistics. That term is incorrect but it’s difficult to shake such common practices. Ballistics is actually the science of projectile motion, which means how a bullet, artillery shell, rocket, or other hurled object travels. How firearms work and how guns and ammunition are identified and compared is the job of the forensic firearms examiner.
In Chapter Seven, we looked at what bullets do to the human body and how the coroner evaluates such injuries. In this chapter we will look at guns and ammunition and how their identification and comparison can solve the many crimes in which guns play a role.
Deaths from gunshots may be accidental, suicidal, or homicidal. In the latter situation, evidence provided by the gun or the ammunition often proves to be the perpetrator’s undoing. As part of his duties, the forensic firearms examiner might be asked to:
• analyze bullets and shell casings to determine what type of weapon fired them 
• help with crime scene reconstruction by estimating the distance between the gun muzzle and the victim or by working out the trajectory of the bullets 
• match a bullet or shell casing to a particular weapon 
• compare bullets or shell casings obtained at different crime scenes with the hope of linking the two crimes to one another  
To perform his duties, the firearms examiner must be familiar with all types of firearms and ammunition and must understand the inner workings and ballistic characteristics of each.
WEAPON AND AMMUNITION COMPONENTS  
Guns are typically classified as handguns, rifles, or shotguns. A handgun can be held and fired in one hand, while rifles and shotguns are typically held against the shoulder and fired from that position. Handguns are further classified as revolvers, semiautomatic pistols, or machine pistols. While shotgun barrels are smooth-bored, rifles and handguns have grooves cut into the inside of the barrel. The areas between the grooves are called lands. This means that the lands are the high points and the grooves are the valleys between the lands. These grooves spiral down the barrel and impart spin to the bullet, which greatly increases the weapon’s accuracy.
Rifle and handgun cartridges have several components. The bullet (the actual projectile) fits into a shell casing that is filled with smokeless powder. It is the explosion of this powder that propels the bullet from the gun. The shell casing remains in the cylinder of a revolver until manually removed, while in most automatic weapons, it is ejected.
The shell casing usually retains marks, such as the impression left by the firing pin as well as breechblock marks. The good news for the examiner is that these marks tend to be highly individual to the particular gun that fired the cartridge.
In automatic and semiautomatic weapons, the casings typically show extractor and ejector marks. These result from the mechanism that ejects the spent cartridge and seats a new one in the firing chamber. These also vary among weapons and may serve to match a shell casing to a particular gun.
True gunpowder is rarely seen today, except in self-loaded ammunition, since it has been replaced by smokeless powder. Yet, the term gunpowder remains in common usage for both types of explosive powder. Depending on their chemical composition, these smokeless powders are termed single-, double-, or triple-based. Single-based powders contain nitrocellulose as the only explosive component. Double-based powders contain nitrocellulose and nitroglycerin, while triple-based ones also contain nitroguanidine. 
Powders also contain stabilizers such as diphenylamine and ethyl centralite. Other additives include plasticizers (to reduce the absorption of moisture by the powders) and flash suppressants. The chemical makeup of the powder and the type and amount of each of these additives varies among manufacturers.
The base or bottom of most cartridges possesses a centrally located cup of primer. These are called centerfire cartridges. When the shooter pulls the trigger, the gun’s firing pin strikes the primer cup and ignites the primer. The primer in turn ignites the powder, which explodes and produces large amounts of gases, predominantly carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen oxide. These gases force the bullet from the shell casing and through the barrel.
Some shells do not have a primer cup, but instead have the primer around the rim of the shell. The guns that use these types of cartridges, typically .22 caliber weapons, are termed rimfire weapons because the firing pin strikes the rim of the shell, not the central area.
BULLET AND SHELL CASING EXAMINATION 
Interestingly, the first use of “ballistic” evidence to solve a crime did not involve a bullet, but rather the paper wadding used in arming a muzzle-loaded weapon. The value of bullet striations came later. The major events and discoveries that led to modern forensic firearms examination include:
1784: In Lancashire, England, Edward Culshaw was lethally wounded by a shot from a muzzle-loading flintlock pistol. A surgeon removed from Culshaw’s wound a bit of paper wadding that had been used to pack the powder in the gun. The paper proved to be a jigsaw match for paper found in the pocket of the chief suspect, John Toms, who was convicted of the crime.
1835: In a case of breaking and entering and burglary in which a servant suffered a gunshot wound, Henry Goddard (1866–1957), one of Scotland Yard’s Bow Street Runners, noticed an odd “bump” on the fired bullet that he had dug from the headboard of the servant’s bed. He then examined the servant’s own bullet mould (bullets were handmade then) and saw that the mould had a defect that matched the mark on the bullet. He concluded that the man had made the bullet in his own mould, and had thus shot himself to cover his theft, and that no outsider had been involved.
1863: The bullet that killed Confederate General Stonewall Jackson was found to be a 0.67 caliber ball, the size used by Confederate forces. Since the Union troops used a 0.58 caliber ball, the killing bullet must have been fired by one of Jackson’s own men.
1864: Union General John Sedgwick fell to a Confederate sniper, who fired from a distance of eight hundred yards. The caliber and the hexagonal shape of the bullet indicated that it had come from an English-made Whitworth rifle, imported by the Confederacy for use by snipers.
1889: Alexandre Lacassagne (1843–1924) discovered that marks found on bullets recovered from shooting victims could be matched to a particular gun barrel by simply counting the number of grooves.
1898: Dr. Paul Jeserich (1854–1927) used a microscope to compare the striations on two bullets fired by the same gun.
1913: French Professor Victor Balthazard (1872–1950) stated in his paper “Archives of Criminal Anthropology and Legal Medicine” that each fired bullet carried with it unique marks.
1920: Physicist John Fisher invents the helixometer, a probe fitted with a light and magnifying glass, which allowed a detailed examination of the inside of a gun barrel.
1920: The Sacco and Vanzetti case brought firearms examinations to the public attention.
1923: In New York City, Charles Waite, Philip Gravelle, Calvin Goddard, and John H. Fisher established the Bureau of Forensic Ballistics to offer firearm identification services throughout the United States.
1925: Gravelle and Goddard invented the comparison microscope, which revolutionized firearms examinations.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: SACCO AND VANZETTI 
This case cemented firearms examination techniques as viable tools in forensic investigations. On April 15, 1920, security guards Alessandro Berardelli and Frederick Parmenter were shot dead by two men who absconded with more than $15,000 of payroll money. The only evidence found at the scene were several shell casings, which were manufactured by three firms: Remington, Winchester, and Peters. Two days later, the getaway car was found and traced to an earlier robbery, which ultimately led police to Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti. Sacco had a .32 caliber handgun, the same caliber as the murder weapon, and a total of twenty-nine bullets manufactured by Remington, Winchester, or Peters. The two were arrested and charged with double murder.
Since the two men belonged to an anarchist movement that advocated violent political change, the case became America’s first “Red Scare.” The defense team put together an alliance of anarchist, communist, and union leaders called the Sacco-Vanzetti Defense Committee, who labeled the trial a “witch hunt.”
The case hinged on proving that the killing bullets came from Sacco’s gun. A match was made and Sacco and Vanzetti were convicted and sentenced to death. But, that didn’t end the story. Not even close.
Because of continued protests by anarchists, in June 1927, a committee was formed to look into the case. America’s leading ballistic expert Calvin Goddard of the Bureau of Forensic Ballistics in New York entered the case with two new forensic tools: the comparison microscope and the helixometer. The former allowed side-by-side comparison of two bullets while the later was a probe fitted with a light and magnifying glass, which allowed a detailed examination of the inside of a gun barrel. Again, the match was conclusive.
On August 23, 1927, the two killers died in the electric chair. Yet the controversy persisted. In 1961 and again in 1983 the case was reexamined and on each occasion Goddard’s findings were confirmed.
WEAPON TYPE 
A gun found at a crime scene or confiscated from a suspect can provide a great deal of evidence. It might be matched to the killing bullet or to bullets from other crime scenes. It can serve as a substrate for fingerprints and trace evidence such as blood, hair, and fibers from the perpetrator that cling to the weapon. Blowback of blood and tissues from the victim in close-range shootings might provide the only link between the victim and the weapon in cases where no bullet is recovered.
But what if only a bullet is found? With no gun to compare it to, how can the forensics team use this piece of evidence?
Let’s say a bullet is removed by the ME at autopsy and presented to the firearms examiner so he can attempt to determine the type of weapon that fired the bullet.
The examiner first attempts to identify the caliber and type of bullet. If the bullet is intact, or mostly so, the caliber can be determined by a simple measurement. If it is severely deformed, it can be weighed, which doesn’t give the exact caliber but eliminates some calibers. For example, the weight of .22 caliber and .44 caliber bullets are very different. If the bullet is heavy, then a .44 or .45 caliber weapon is more likely the gun of origin.
The type of jacketing, if any, is easily determined, which often helps identify the type of weapon used. A fully jacketed bullet is typically fired from a rifle, while a simple lead bullet most likely came from a small-caliber handgun.
Earlier, I said that different manufacturers produce barrels with different numbers and widths of lands and grooves and with different directions and degrees of twisting. The examiner uses these rifling characteristics when confronted with an unknown bullet. This places the weapon into one of several categories.
COLT TYPE: Six broad grooves, narrow lands, and a left-hand twist.
BROWNING TYPE: Six broad grooves, narrow lands, and a right-hand twist.
SMITH & WESSON TYPE: Five lands and grooves of equal width and a right-hand twist.
WEBLEY TYPE: Seven broad grooves, narrow lands, and a right-hand twist.
MARLIN TYPE: Marlin rifles use a technique known as microgrooving, which leaves between eight and twenty-four narrow grooves inside the barrel.
Armed with this knowledge, if the examiner is given a .32 caliber bullet recovered at autopsy and he finds ballistic striations consistent with the bullet having traveled down a barrel with five lands and a right twist, the weapon was likely a Smith & Wesson. Investigators can then focus on .32 caliber handguns manufactured by Smith & Wesson.
To help firearms examiners in these determinations, the FBI maintains a database known as the General Rifling Characteristics (GRC) file. It is a listing of land, groove, and twist characteristics of known weapons.
BULLET EXAMINATION 
The lands and grooves inside a rifled barrel not only impart spin to the bullet but also cut into its side, leaving behind marks called striations. These marks are linear and parallel to the long axis of the bullet. They lie at the heart of ballistic comparisons. As you would expect, they are more prominent on soft lead bullets and may be extremely faint or absent on metal or Teflon-jacketed ones.
Each rifled barrel possesses minute characteristics that differentiate it from all others. For one thing, the manufacturer’s rifling tool cuts through each metallic barrel a little differently. Also, the cutting or etching equipment itself becomes worn and damaged with each use. This progressive wear and tear produces rifling patterns that vary from barrel to barrel.
In addition, the grooves and lands undergo wear and damage with repeated firing of the weapon, which adds even more individual characteristics to the barrel and thus to any bullet that travels through it. This means that bullets fired from the same gun share the same striation patterns, while those fired from different guns do not.
With an intact bullet, striation comparison is usually easy, but unfortunately the examiner rarely receives an undamaged bullet. More often, he gets bullets that have struck bones or walls or other solid objects, and they are usually misshapen or fragmented. Still, if the bullet is not severely deformed, it can provide a wealth of information.
During the collection and handling of any crime scene bullet, great care must be taken not to damage or alter it. Whether removed from a body in surgery, at autopsy, or from a wall at the crime scene, the bullet is handled carefully. For example, a bullet grasped by a surgical instrument or pried from a doorjamb might be damaged and extraneous marks might be added to the striation pattern, making matching the bullet to a suspect weapon difficult or impossible.
If the bullet is more or less intact, a microscopic examination will reveal the rifling pattern imprinted on it. We’ve already seen that the number of grooves and the direction and degree of twist can help determine the type and manufacturer of the weapon. This is considered class evidence since it cannot pinpoint exactly which gun fired the bullet. But when viewed under magnification, smaller, individualizing striations are visible; these are what the firearms examiner looks at when he is analyzing a bullet.
These individualizing striations are useful in many situations. For example, multiple bullets found at a crime scene can be compared to see if they came from one gun. If not, more than one weapon was used. Or, bullets collected at two different crime scenes can be compared to determine if the same gun fired them. If so, this strongly connects the two crimes. Most importantly, a bullet removed from a homicide victim can be compared against a suspect weapon. A match means that the murder weapon has been identified, which might be the key to identifying the killer. Similarly, if a victim is shot by two assailants, matching the killing bullet to one of the guns indicates which shooter would face the more serious charges.
The first step in this comparison process is to obtain an intact bullet fired by the suspect weapon. The examiner, using similar ammunition, discharges the weapon into a test-firing chamber. This may be a bullet trap or a water trap, either of which captures the bullet without damaging it. The lab-fired bullet (known) can then be compared with the crime scene bullet (unknown) by using a comparison microscope, which places images of the two bullets side by side (see the appendix).
It is important to note that the two bullets do not have to match in every detail. In fact, they essentially never do. The reason is that each bullet that travels down the barrel alters the barrel slightly and leaves behind soot and grit. These changes within the barrel along with the deposited foreign materials alter the imprint left on the next bullet. This means that the two bullets will have slightly different markings. Though the two bullets do not need to be identical, a match requires that identical patterns be found on at least three consecutive striations on each bullet.
Silencers, which muffle the sound from the gun muzzle, can also leave markings on the bullet, but these are unpredictable. A bullet thus marked may not match the gun if the silencer is not also available for the test firing.
Also, the bullet could have important trace evidence attached. Paint, fibers, bits of glass, and other materials can cling to the bullet as it passes through or ricochets off walls, doors, bricks, and windows. Small bits of flesh and blood may also be found. These microscopic bits can on occasion be the key to solving a case or to reconstructing a crime scene.
For example, a husband might say that his wife ran away from home. Family and friends insist she would not do that. During their investigation, the police find a bullet embedded in a basement wall and the crime lab discovers it holds a speck of blood, which is then matched to DNA obtained from the missing woman’s hair in her hairbrush. Even without a body, such evidence could lead to an indictment.
Shotguns do not have rifled barrels. They fire a wad of pellets (shot) rather than a single bullet, so striation comparisons are not part of the examination of shotgun ammunition. After a shotgun has been discharged as part of some criminal activity, the shot can often be extracted from walls or furniture, for example, or from victims, either in surgery or at autopsy. The size of the shot does not determine the gauge of the shotgun but does give information about the ammunition used. The various sizes of shot are numbered, with the lower the number the larger the pellets within the shotgun shell. For instance, a No. 8 shot is smaller than a No. 4. They vary in size from 0.05 inch for No. 12 shot to 0.33 inch for OO shot, also called double-O buckshot. The examiner can measure the diameter of any recovered shot and estimate what size shot was used.
SHELL CASING EXAMINATION 
At some crime scenes, bullets are not found and the only ballistic evidence available is one or more shell casings. These casings often carry several types of marks that are of interest to the ballistics examiner. As with bullets, the comparison of multiple casings found at one scene, or casings found at different scenes, or casings from a test-fired suspect weapon, may provide important information. Useful shell case markings include:
FIRING PIN IMPRESSIONS: Whether the casing is centerfire or rimfire, the firing pin impression is usually unique enough to make a match.
BREECHBLOCK MARKINGS: The breechblock is basically the back wall of the firing chamber. When the powder in the casing detonates and pushes the bullet down the barrel, Newtonian physics dictates that the casing is forced back against the breechblock. This leaves an impression on the bottom of the casing.
EXTRACTOR AND EJECTOR MARKINGS: Automatic and semiautomatic weapons have mechanisms that remove the spent shell from the chamber and eject it from the weapon (ejector) and that extract the next bullet from the clip and set it in the firing chamber (extractor). These extracting and ejecting mechanisms leave their own unique scratches and marks on the sides of the shell casings.
Each of these unique marks on the shell casing can be viewed and compared with a comparison microscope. They might be distinctive enough to individualize the casing to a particular weapon. The power of such evidence was first brought to the public’s attention after the infamous St. Valentine’s Day Massacre and reinforced by many other cases such as the odd Branion murder case.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE ST. VALENTINE’S DAY MASSACRE 
During the Roaring Twenties, Prohibition led to warfare among the many crime families in several major U.S. cities, since whoever controlled the flow of illegal alcohol would be assured a hefty income. Nowhere was this war more evident than in Chicago where Al “Scarface” Capone squared off with George “Bugs” Moran.
On the evening of February 14, 1929, seven of Moran’s men waited in a Clark Street warehouse for a shipment of hijacked liquor. Moran himself was late arriving, which ultimately saved his life. As he approached, he saw five police officers enter the warehouse, so he retreated. The “police officers” were actually Capone’s men. Inside the structure, they lined Moran’s seven men up and massacred them with Thompson submachine guns (Tommy guns).
The real police arrived shortly after and ultimately recovered seventy shell casings from the scene and later several bullets from the victims. Because of the high-profile nature of the case and because of his expertise in firearms examinations, cardiologist Dr. Calvin Goddard, who became famous during the Sacco and Vanzetti Case, was called in. He determined that the shell casings were from Thomson submachine guns, and using the newly developed comparison microscope, he determined that none of the Thompsons owned by the Chicago Police Department were the murder weapons. This meant that the killers had impersonated police officers and Capone immediately became the primary suspect. Police raided the home of one of Capone’s hit men and found two Thompsons, which Goddard identified as two of the murder weapons.
Two businessmen in Chicago were so impressed with Goddard’s work that they helped fund the establishment of the Scientific Crime Detection Laboratory (SCDL), the first independent crime lab, at Northwestern University in 1929. Following this model, the FBI set up its own crime lab in 1932.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: JOHN BRANION 
On December 22, 1967, Dr. John Branion left a hospital in south Chicago, passed by his home, picked up his son from nursery school, and then went to the home of a friend who was to have lunch with the Branions. The friend couldn’t make lunch, so Dr. Branion went home, arriving just before noon. Upon entering his he found his wife, Donna, dead on the floor of a utility room. She had suffered multiple gunshot wounds. He called the police.
Firearms expert Burt Nielson examined the shell casings recovered at the scene and the bullets removed from the victim at autopsy and determined that the weapon was a .38 caliber. He also noted distinctive markings on the casings that he recognized as ejector-type markings that could only have come from a Walther PPK. Branion was a gun collector but had told detectives that he did not own a Walther. A warranted search of Branion’s home turned up a Walther PPK brochure, an extra ammunition clip, and a Walther branded target, all of which bore the serial number 188274. Police also found two boxes of .38 caliber ammunition, one full and the other missing four cartridges. Mrs. Branion had been shot four times.
Police contacted the importers of Walther handguns in New York and learned that the Walther PPK bearing the serial number 188274 had been shipped to Chicago and sold to James Hooks, a friend of Dr. Branion. Branion was convicted and sentenced to a long prison term. He was released on bond while he undertook an appeal of his conviction. By 1971, with his appeal going nowhere and facing a return to prison, he fled to Uganda, where he enjoyed the protection of the dictator Idi Amin. He even served as Amin’s personal physician. Unfortunately for Dr. Branion, Amin was toppled and Branion was extradited back to the United States to serve his sentence.
OTHER FIREARMS EXAMINATION TECHNIQUES  
In addition to testing gun types and bullet markings, the forensic firearms examiner is charged with finding other information about the gun, including how far away it was fired from the victim, and how to identify the gun’s owner.
SCATTER PATTERN ASSESSMENT 
One of the important determinations in the investigation of any gunshot is the firing distance. This is the distance between the gun muzzle and the victim. An estimate of this distance can be the difference in a gunshot death being deemed an accident, suicide, or homicide. It can also serve to reconstruct the events of the crime and to support or refute suspect and witness statements.
We saw in Chapter Seven how this distance affects the anatomy of entry wounds. Remember that when a gun is fired, hot gases and burned and un-house, burned gunpowder particles follow the bullet out of the barrel. The ME can usually estimate the firing distance by the effects of these substances on the wound. But sometimes the victim is shot through clothing. In this case, the hot gases and unburned powder that would normally cause tattooing and charring of the victim’s skin are intercepted by the clothing. The ME is left with few, if any, distance markers on the victim’s skin. Enter the firearms examiner.
As with gunshot entry wounds, the residue pattern on the garment depends on the firing distance: The further the distance, the wider the spread of the residue—up to a point. Once the firing distance exceeds the distance the gases and particles travel, no residue pattern is produced.
To accurately estimate the distance, the examiner uses the suspect weapon and similar ammunition and performs a series of test firings into similar fabric from several different distances. It is important to use the same weapon and similar ammunition in order to make the test an accurate representation of the actual shooting event. He then compares the residue pattern on the test shots with those on the crime scene garment and estimates the firing distance.
Let’s say a victim has been shot in the chest through his shirt, and that the firearms examiner uses the weapon and similar ammunition to perform test firings at four, ten, and eighteen inches, as well as two and three feet. He then compares the residue pattern on the test garments with that of the victim’s and finds that the closest match is with the eighteen-inch test shot. He then estimates the firing distance at approximately eighteen inches.
A similar comparison can estimate the firing distance when a shotgun is the weapon involved. This was discussed in detail in Chapter Seven.
GUNSHOT RESIDUES 
When a gun is fired, the primer and the powder within the cartridge explode, forcing the bullet down the barrel followed by most, but not all, of the explosive gases and particulate matter produced by the explosion. However, some of these materials escape through the breech and other openings in the weapon. This is particularly true of revolvers, which tend to “leak” more gases than other types of weapons. The chemical and particulate components of these gases, called gunshot residue (GSR), cling to the shooter’s hand, arm, clothing, face, and hair, They may also settle on nearby walls or furniture as well as on the victim’s skin and clothing in close-range gunshots.
Wind and rain often lessen or change the pattern of spread of the residue cloud so that GSR may be found in areas where the examiner would not expect to, and not in areas where he would. On light clothing, the GSR pattern may be readily visible as a smudge or smear, whereas on dark, multicolored, or bloodstained clothing, the pattern may be obscured. Infrared photography often reveals GSR stains among these patterns. The pattern may also be revealed by the Griess test. This test uses a sheet of photographic paper or a sheet of acetic-acid-dampened filter paper. Either is pressed over the area and then immersed in Griess reagent, which reacts with the inorganic nitrites in the GSR, revealing the pattern.
The ultimate goal of GSR analysis is to place the gun “in the suspect’s hand.” Unfortunately, the residue cloud isn’t that cooperative. Simply being near the gun when it was discharged or handling the gun afterward can leave behind GSR on an innocent person.
GSR tends to fade rapidly and is usually dissipated after about two hours. It can also be wiped or washed away. For this reason, testing should be accomplished as soon after the gun is fired as possible.
The suspect’s hands, face, and clothing should be inspected and samples obtained. The old paraffin test, where melted paraffin was used to pick up the residue from the shooter’s hands, is rarely used anymore. Instead, sampling is done by swabbing the suspect’s hands, arms, and clothing with a moist swab or filter paper.
Chemical analysis looks for the byproducts of primer and gunpowder combustion, which are predominantly the metals lead, barium, and antimony. To identify these, the swab or filter paper is treated with diphenylamine, which turns a blue color when positive. Unfortunately, other substances such as fertilizer, tobacco, cosmetics, and urine can yield false positive results. This means that the presence of GSR must be confirmed by more specific confirmatory tests such as neutron activation analysis and atomic absorption spectrometry (see the appendix). A positive result is the finding of elevated levels of barium and antimony.
Sometimes GSR is found not on the shooter’s hands, but on his clothing or in his hair. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) can often locate these tiny GSR particles (see the appendix). SEM is often paired with energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS), which gives a “chemical fingerprint” of the substance tested. Using SEM/EDS, the finding of lead, barium, and antimony in such small particles is highly suggestive that the particle is indeed GSR. This technique was developed in 1974 by J.S. Wessel, P.F. Jones, and R.S. Nesbitt.
RESTORING SERIAL NUMBERS 
Sometimes it’s obvious that a particular gun was the murder weapon. It is found at the crime scene, along the perpetrator’s escape route, or where it was discarded, and the forensic firearms examiner matches the gun to the bullets removed from the victim. But that information doesn’t identify the gun’s owner or who fired it. In this situation it is useful to discover if anyone had registered the gun. Even if the registered owner is not the killer, he might have given the gun to someone, or it might have been stolen and the murder and the gun theft can be linked. Comparing the evidence in the two cases would move the investigators closer to identifying the perpetrator.
But criminals are clever. They often attempt to grind or file away the gun’s serial number in the hopes that the weapon can’t be traced. If so, the examiner has a few tricks he can employ in these situations.
The most common are magnaflux, chemical and electrochemical etching, and ultrasonic cavitation. Each relies on the changes in the structure of the gun’s metal that follows the serial number stamping process. When the metal is pressure-stamped, not only is the metal indented with the numbers, but also the metal beneath the numbers is stressed and undergoes structural changes.
MAGNAFLUX: This is only useful if the weapon is composed of iron-containing metals. The gun is placed in a strong electromagnetic field or beneath a strong magnet, which magnetizes the weapon. The lines of magnetic force in a magnetized object usually run parallel to each other, but the disordered metal beneath the stamped numbers disrupt this order. The gun is then sprayed with a special oil in which iron-like particles are suspended. The particles tend to collect in the areas of disordered metal, thus revealing the hidden number. The major advantage of this process is it is nondestructive and doesn’t alter the weapon.
CHEMICAL AND ELECTROCHEMICAL ETCHING: These are destructive processes, which limits their use. They involve the painting of an etching solution over the area in question. The chemical eats the disordered metal faster than the surrounding metal, and thus brings the numbers into view. Adding an electric current (electrochemical etching) hastens the process. Either of these must be done carefully, since over-etching will destroy the evidence forever.
ULTRASONIC CAVITATION: This technique is similar to chemical etching and is also a destructive process. The gun is placed in a special ultrasonic bath and exposed to very high-frequency vibrations. This causes cavitation, a process in which tiny bubbles form along the surface of the metal. With continued exposure, the cavitation begins to eat away the metal. The process is fastest in the areas of disorder and, as with chemical etching, the serial number might be revealed.
NATIONAL BALLISTIC DATABASE SYSTEMS  
What if the ballistics examiner is given only a single bullet or shell casing and no suspect weapon to match it against? As mentioned earlier, he can often determine the type and manufacturer of the weapon that fired the bullet, but that’s about as far as he could go. Now, thanks to computer technology, he might also be able to compare the ballistic markings with databases of markings taken from weapons used in other crimes. Several databases of this type exist at present.
DRUGFIRE: The FBI developed this ballistic identification system in the 1990s, though it has recently been replaced by IBIS.
INTEGRATED BALLISTICS IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM (IBIS): IBIS is maintained by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (BATFE or ATF, as it is commonly called). This computer-based system stores digital photos of fired bullets and shell casings.
NATIONAL INTEGRATED BALLISTIC INFORMATION NETWORK (NIBIN): NIBIN is a joint venture between the FBI and the ATF that uses the IBIS system to compare ballistic markings.
These databases remain incomplete, but if images of the bullet or shell casing from the same weapon that fired a crime scene bullet or casing is in the IBIS system, a match will serve to connect two scenes. IBIS computers can rapidly compare hundreds of records and separate out possible matches. Then an experienced firearms examiner can make the final match. 
