---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0014.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["scene", "crime", "body", "officer", "evidence", "blood", "detective", "investigator", "victim", "police", "area", "must", "knife", "often", "insect", "search", "weapon", "first", "may", "inside", "away", "found", "drop", "time", "used"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0014html

---


7
7CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATIONDetectives and crime scene investigators often think of each other as “highly overrated.” In reality, both are “highly dependent” on the other to successfully solve and prosecute crimes.— LIEUTENANT DAVID SWORDS, RETIRED, SPRINGFIELD, OHIO, POLICE DEPARTMENTIt's important for writers to know that not all crime scene investigators are sworn police officers. Many years ago, before technology was so very important in police investigations, crime scene investigators were always police officers. Now, many departments hire civilian specialists whose duties are to collect and examine the evidence that's found at various crime scenes. It's easier to separate the two positions — police officer and crime scene investigator — because of the difference in training and salaries. Sworn police officers generally earn the higher salary.The job description of crime scene investigator is wide-ranging. These highly skilled workers are trained in areas of expertise such as crime scene photography, latent and patent fingerprinting, computer technology and electronics, blood-spatter examination, firearms and ballistics, and tool and tool-mark examinations. Police detectives, especially homicide detectives, normally receive training in all the above areas.To understand how a crime scene investigation is conducted, one must understand the difference between a crime scene and the scene of a crime. The scene of the crime is any area where a crime has been committed. A crime scene is an area where evidence from a crime can be found. For example, let's say a store clerk is robbed and killed during a robbery. The store where this incident took place is the scene of the crime.Hours later, the robber is driving the getaway car down a deserted country road. He rolls down the car window and tosses the murder weapon into the bushes, where it's later found by a farmer. The area where the gun is found is now a crime scene because evidence of a crime is located there. Police detectives seal the area surrounding the gun and gather any evidence that can be found. Both locations are crime scenes, but both aren't the actual scene of the crime.Investigators handle the scene of a crime differently than crime scenes because the danger level is often higher. Responding officers must be alert for the presence of the perpetrators and their accomplices.THE CRIME SCENEDeath comes in many forms and is accomplished by many methods. A killer, or would-be killer, sometimes uses a weapon other than the traditional gun or knife. A killing that takes place on the spur of the moment can force a murderer to become quite creative with his choice of weapons.When approaching a crime scene, officers should never rule out any one object as a potential murder weapon. People have killed with hammers, baseball bats, poisons, electric shocks, knives, forks, needles, drugs, reptiles, automobiles, trains, planes, water, pillows, wire, axes, hatchets, nail guns, screwdrivers, and their bare hands.At all costs, officers should avoid adrenaline-induced tunnel vision. Once the blue lights begin to flash and the sirens start to wail and yelp, excitement makes it quite easy for officers to lose track of their surroundings. Their heartbeats become rapid, and their tone of speech sometimes climbs another octave (the voice change is evident to anyone who's listened to a police radio or a scanner). However, when officers are traveling to the scene of a crime or a crime scene, especially a crime in progress, they should always take the time to scan the area on the way. They should look on both sides of the road, on walkways and sidewalks, in parking lots, in neighbors' lawns, beside bushes, in wooded areas, and at passing cars. It's quite possible they'll see the criminal departing the scene or hanging around to watch the police arrive. Criminals often like to watch the police conduct investigations.Police officers are schooled to protect all evidence, but protecting human life comes first. In most instances, an officer should wait for backup before proceeding into a crime scene, but when someone is ill or injured she may have to enter to administer first aid.Once an area has been established as a crime scene and they've provided any necessary first aid, officers should set up and secure a perimeter, allowing only necessary personnel — the detectives investigating the case, the medical examiner, and the crime scene and evidence technicians — inside the crime scene. A chief of police, sheriff, and the mayor of the city don't count as necessary people, although they seem to think they are, especially during election years or when members of the press are present.THE FIRST OFFICER ON THE SCENEThe first officer on the scene of a homicide, or any crime scene, is most often a uniformed patrol officer. The dispatcher receives a 911 telephone call, and he assigns the case to the next patrol officer on the rotation. Depending upon the severity of the crime and the danger level, more than one officer may be assigned to the same case.Upon her arrival at the scene of a crime, a responding officer must first, if necessary, defend herself or others against attackers. It's then her responsibility to provide first aid to the injured and protect the scene and the remaining victims, or witnesses, from harm. It's her duty to make the necessary arrangements to contact emergency personnel, the medical examiner, the crime scene investigation team, and the detectives on duty or on call.Patrol officers carry basic crime scene equipment in the trunks of their vehicles.Each patrol car should be equipped to properly safeguard a crime scene, and each responding officer should have the knowledge and ability to process the entire scene in the event that all detectives or crime scene investigators are busy elsewhere. The following basic crime scene equipment can be found in each responding police vehicle:consent-to-search formscrime scene barricade tapepersonal protective equipmentfirst aid kitpaper bagsflashlightflaresnotebook or note padtape recordercameraplastic bagsknife/scissorstape measuretraffic coneshand cleanercell phoneTHE CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATORUpon arrival at the crime scene, the investigators, or detectives, assume charge of the scene. They may require the assistance of the uniformed officers for perimeter control, crowd control, media access, and security. If they require no further assistance from the uniformed officers, the detective in charge may dismiss them to continue their patrol duties. At this point the investigation begins.Detectives use a variety of means to solve crimes of all types. Those means can be as simple as speaking with witnesses. Investigators can also use any number of scientific tests to aid them in their quests for a killer's identity.The chart below describes some of the duties and responsibilities of the crime scene investigator.DUTY OF A CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATORACTION TAKENRespond to the call.Record time, date, and location. Record names of all persons present.Establish the perimeter.Assure that the scene is safe and first aid is rendered. Seal the area. Allow no one to enter or leave unless authorized by detectives.Survey the crime scene.Determine the type of search to be used. Call for assistance if needed.Check the body for signs of life and for evidence of the murder method.Check the pulse, pupils (touch eyes for response), bleeding, wounds, livor mortis, and rigor mortis.Respond to the medical examiner's arrival.Note the time of arrival. Also note the medical examiner's opinion as to the cause of death. Arrange to meet with the medical examiner for autopsy, etc. Arrange to obtain a copy of the death certificate.Photograph the crime scene.Take overall photographs of the scene from all angles.Make a crime scene sketch.Take measurements and sketch the crime scene, identifying each item of evidence.Note all observations of the scene.Light switches on or off, weather, heat settings, windows open or closed, doors locked or unlocked, pets, ashtrays and contents, beverages, food, refrigerator and freezer contents, food in the oven or microwave, mail, computers, answering machine messages, TV/radio on or off, cell phone/pager messages, address books, cash, credit cards, etc.Look for the obvious.Sometimes we get caught up in the excitement and overlook simple things, such as a wallet left by the killer on an end table, or a medicine bottle prescribed to a person other then the victim or the victim's family.Look for things that should be there but aren't.Wallets, watches, keys, wills, purses and pocketbooks, children, pets, firearms, etc.TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT OF THE CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATOREach police investigator has her favorite method and means of evidence collection, although the end result must remain the same. All samples must be presented to the laboratories in a similar manner. The equipment used by these specialists is standard. Below is a list of items typically found in the toolboxes of a crime scene investigator. You'll notice some of these items are a repeat of the responding officer's equipment. Sometimes the detective is the first officer on the scene. A first-responding uniformed officer may also collect evidence if detectives aren't available.bindle paperbiohazard bagsblood-test suppliesbody-fluid collection kitbusiness cardscamera (35mm or digital) with flash/film/tripod (some courts won't accept digital photography as evidence due to the possibility that the images may be altered)casting materialscell phoneconsent-to-search formscrime scene barricade tapecutting instruments (knives, box cutter, scalpel, scissors)disinfectantevidence-collection containersevidence identifiersextension cordsfirst aid kitflaresflashlight/batteriesgunshot residue kithigh-intensity lightslatent-print kitmagnifying glassmarking paintmeasuring devices (tape measure, ruler)mirrornarcotics test kitpermanent markerspersonal protective equipmentphotographic scale (ruler, engineer's scale)sealing tapeshoeprint lifting kitsketch paper (graph)stringtemplatesthermometertire-impression kittool kit (screwdriver, pliers, etc.)traffic conestweezerstape recorderUV light (black light)video recorderInvestigators should make a detailed drawing of each homicide scene. To do so, many detectives and technicians prefer to use a crime scene sketch kit such as the one pictured above.CRIME SCENE LOGBOOKA uniformed officer is normally assigned to maintain a logbook at the entrance to the scene of a major crime. The logbook is used to record the names, dates, and times of those persons entering and exiting the sealed area. This record is necessary for future comparison of evidence, such as footprints. The log is admissible in court as an accurate depiction of events, such as the removal of the body by the medical examiner's office and the arrival and departure times of investigators.CRIME SCENE LOGName and AgencyDateTime InTime OutPurpose of VisitSignature and RankJoe Cop Anytown P.D.6-7-071030 hrs1330 hrsInvestigationJoe Cop, Det. Sgt.Hugh S.Body Office of M.E.6-7-071047 hrs1133 hrsExam and body transportHugh Body, Medical ExaminerIt's imperative that investigators minimize foot traffic in crime scenes to prevent the removal or destruction of evidence. It's also possible for people to add unwanted items to a crime scene that could be mistaken for evidence. Photographers drop film canisters and paper, reporters smoke cigarettes, and mayors and police chiefs chew gum. One piece of chewing gum found at crime scene can result in many hours of wasted laboratory testing and paperwork. It's best to eliminate the problem before it begins by refusing entry to the scene unless a person's presence is absolutely necessary.Uniformed officers are often stationed outside and around the crime scene to prevent anyone who isn't a police officer from entering the scene. Crime scene tape is often used as a barrier; however, other items can be used as well, such as folding road signs, police vehicles, and even people.Homicide scenes inspire passionate emotions, especially from family and close friends. Often family members feel they have the right to be inside a house, or particular piece of property, where their loved one was killed. Not true. Family and friends are normally not allowed inside a crime scene.Once a crime scene is established, no one is allowed to be on the premises without the permission of the officer in charge. The officer in charge is more often than not a detective.CRIME SCENE SEARCH PATTERNSCrime scenes must be searched effectively and meticulously. The illustrations that follow are examples of search methods taught in police academies and crime scene workshops and schools. The four most common search methods used by police are:Spiral Search PatternA single officer searching a crime scene will often use a spiral search pattern. The officer begins the search at the body — or other source of a crime or piece of evidence — and begins the search by walking away from, and simultaneously circling, the body, as in the drawing below. He continues this pattern until he's searched and examined the entire scene for evidence.Block Search PatternOfficers often conduct searches by sectioning and numbering an area that contains a crime scene. In the figure at the top of the next page, two rooms of a house have been sketched and sectioned, and each section has been assigned a corresponding number. These number assignments aid the police and court in determining the exact position of a body or evidence.Grid Search PatternOfficers can divide a crime scene into grids and search the individual grids for evidence. Imaginary lines mark the area deemed the crime scene, and the officers travel through the entire location in a manner such as that shown below.Strip Search PatternOfficers can divide narrow crime scenes, such as an alleyway or a hallway, into strips for searching purposes. The individual blocks can be numbered for future reference.INSIDE THE CRIME SCENEWhat goes on behind the yellow crime scene tape isn't the flurry of activity portrayed on television. In fact, the yellow crime scene tape isn't even used at every crime scene. Larger departments normally use the tape as a means to keep people out of a crime scene and to keep evidence in, but smaller departments may not use the tape at all. In fact, there are small departments that have never used crime scene tape to barricade a scene. Their budgets don't allow for the purchase of items that aren't absolutely necessary.COLLECTING THE EVIDENCEDr. Edmond Locard, the director of the first crime lab in France, formed the basis for forensic sciences. His work became known as Locard's exchange principle and remains the cornerstone of today's investigations. In Crime Investigation, second edition, by Paul Leland Kirk and John I. Thornton, Locard states:Wherever he steps, whatever he touches, whatever he leaves, even unconsciously, will serve as a silent witness against him. Not only his fingerprints or his footprints, but his hair, the fibers from his clothes, the glass he breaks, the tool marks he leaves, the paint he scratches, the blood or semen he deposits or collects. All of these and more bear mute witness against him. This is evidence that does not forget. It is not confused by the excitement of the moment. It is not absent because human witnesses are. It is factual evidence. Physical evidence cannot be wrong, it cannot perjure itself, it cannot be wholly absent. Only human failure to find it, study it, and understand it can diminish its value.A crime scene investigator or detective must be cautious — not only in her efforts to protect and preserve evidence but to protect herself from coming in contact with the body fluids of the victims and their attackers. All police officers and investigators should carry protective equipment in their vehicles. Uniformed officers wear a pouch attached to their gun belts that contains at least one pair of latex gloves. They also wear the gloves when performing pat down searches as a barrier between their bare hands and the skin and clothing of suspects.It's important that nobody disturb a crime scene until the entire area has been photographed and sketched. Detectives often stand in or near a scene and allow their eyes to examine in the entire area. Their minds form possible scenarios as to what happened, how it happened, and why. Who was standing where when the death blow was dealt? It is here, looking and thinking, that detectives achieve some of their best work.The actual collection of physical evidence is a slow, arduous task. Investigators must be organized and careful when approaching the scene and collecting all the evidence they discover. All evidence must be properly photographed and accurately identified along with its corresponding location before it's bagged, tagged, and removed from the scene.Detectives must be systematic and methodical, yet they must keep an open mind. A good detective can effectively mesh together science and imagination.INDOOR CRIME SCENEA murder that occurs within the home of a victim will instantly set off a detective's internal alarm system and guide his radar to the spouse as the initial suspect. When a detective approaches an indoor crime scene, he should first look for the obvious, such as footprints in the carpet. These prints can be of tremendous value in the later investigation. The size of the killer's foot can eliminate or identify potential suspects. The detective must photograph the area from all angles before allowing evidence to be moved or gathered. Thermostats should be checked and their settings recorded. The inside and outdoor air temperatures should be compared and recorded as well. All doors and windows should be checked for lock tampering and pry marks. The presence of insects should be noted, and detectives should make a note of the presence or absence of family pets.A search of the kitchen provides investigators with some very important information. Food left out on countertops or stove tops can reveal the contents of a victim's last meal. The number of glasses and utensils could indicate the number of people who shared a last meal with the victim. A knife missing from a countertop knife block could be the missing murder weapon. Garbage disposals and sink traps can contain body tissue and fluids. The same is true for bathroom drains and showers. The wall behind a toilet or urinal is an excellent source for finger and palm prints (some men have a habit of leaning or placing a hand against the wall in front of them while urinating).Murder weapons and other evidence have been discovered in toilet tanks, septic tanks, freezers, refrigerators, ovens, and pots on the stove; under rugs, carpeting, and beds; between and inside mattresses; inside floor, ceiling, and wall vents; inside light switches and receptacles; taped to the bottom of drawers; inside secret wall and floor panels, safes, and light fixtures; and even inside a human body. X-rays have shown many strange things inside the human body, such as lightbulbs, keys, knives, drugs, and bullets. An entire hacksaw blade was once discovered in the rectum of a prison inmate.OUTDOOR CRIME SCENEIn an outdoor crime scene, an officer must establish and secure a perimeter, and she must make sure the entire area is searched for evidence, such as foot prints, discarded papers, wrappers, cans, bottles, insects, the victim's belongings, clothing, and tire impressions.Snow impression wax allows investigators to make shoe and tire impressions without melting surrounding snow.Dust and dirt hardener for making tire and shoe impressions.Detectives must keep in mind that a crime scene can possibly be altered by weather conditions. Wind can blow away trace evidence, rain can wash away fibers, and sunlight can destroy DNA. Therefore, investigators must take appropriate steps to protect crime scenes. For example, during a rain shower, a body can be covered with a tarp to prevent it from the elements.Crime scene investigators should always be completely aware of their surroundings. Evidence can be located in odd places, such as in trees and shrubbery (clothing can snag on overhanging branches), and animals can drag it away to areas many feet away from the actual scene.BLOOD-PATTERN EVIDENCE, INTERPRETATION, AND ANALYSISPatterns created by blood that's been transferred from a human body to another object or surface can be instrumental in solving a murder case. It takes a trained eye and years of investigative experience to decipher the meaning that's hidden in wet evidence. There are three basic types of bloodstains — passive, projected, and transferred.Passive bloodstains are created by a wound that drips or seeps, allowing gravity to pull the droplets downward naturally. When a drop of blood strikes a surface, it's called spatter. The force of impact sometimes causes the spatter to divide into several much smaller droplets called secondary spatter. Some droplets are so tiny that they're barely able to be seen with the naked eye.Bloodstain from a single drop of blood striking a smooth surface, after falling from a distance of eight inches.Bloodstain from a single drop of blood striking a smooth surface, after falling from a distance of forty-two inches.Bloodstain from a single drop of blood striking a smooth surface, after falling from a distance of seventy-two inches.Projected bloodstains occur when blood is forced in a direction other than the downward path caused by the natural pull of gravity. Blood can be propelled away from a body in many ways: from severed arteries that spurt blood with each beat of the heart; centrifugal force from a moving or flailing lacerated body part; and injuries that force blood away from injured body parts, such as a blow from a hammer or baseball bat.Transferred bloodstains are caused by a wet, bloody object touching another surface, such as a bloody hand that touches a painted wall or door. The stain that's left on the wall is a transferred stain.Projected bloodstain from ten milliliters of blood thrown slightly upward onto a smooth vertical wall. The original stain is in the classic teardrop shape because gravity pulls cast-off blood downward.A victim transfers a bloody handprint — a transfer stain — to a nearby surface.Crime scene investigators are able to determine the positions of the victim and the killer at the time of impact by establishing the angles of bloodstains. The shapes of the stains are also keys to determining the point of impact.A drop of blood that's circular in shape has fallen straight down from a ninety-degree angle to the surface where it landed. Blood spatter that strikes a surface at less than a ninety-degree angle has a distinct teardrop shape. The smaller, more pointed tip of the drop serves as an indicator of the direction of the droplet's travel — it (the tip) always points away from the position of impact. As the angles of travel decrease, the bloodstains become less circular and much longer.Scientists and detectives use a standard trigonometry formula to calculate the exact angle of travel for individual blood droplets. To make the calculations, investigators first measure the length and width of the droplets in question.After obtaining the measurements of the blood drops, detectives can calculate the angle of impact. The formula for determining the angle of impact is:A blood drop that's 1.5 centimeters wide and 3.0 centimeters long can be determined to have traveled at a thirty-degree angle away from the victim to the point of the drop's impact.As the illustration on the next page shows, the point of impact (where the victim was struck) can be determined by simply drawing a line from each of the furthest droplets in a row to the closest droplet in that row. The point where the lines intersect is the point of impact.Surface textures can greatly affect the appearance of spatter. A slick, dense surface causes a blood drop to break apart, spraying smaller droplets in the same direction of travel as the larger drop.An investigator must examine these smaller droplets closely when attempting to determine the speed of the impact. Speed of impact can aid in determining the type of weapon used. Tiny droplets that have been sprayed throughout the room at great distances from a body indicate a very high-velocity impact, while large drops that have landed close to the victim's body indicate free-falling, gravity-pulled blood.The fly in the ointment to this detective's rule of thumb is actually a fly. Flies of all types feed on the blood of the dead. After they've consumed the blood, they move to a warm area of the room — around lamps, windows, and other heat sources — to regurgitate their meals as part of their digestion process. This part of the digestion allows enzymes to break down the blood into a more easily digestible substance. The flies make several trips to and from the body, repeating the regurgitation process. Then they come back to the regurgitated blood at later times to feed on their prepared food. During this course of action, tiny blood specks are transferred throughout the room from both the flies' feet and from regurgitation — the more flies, the more blood specks.These minute specks of blood left behind by feeding flies have the appearance of high-velocity blood spatter and can be confusing to investigators. A close examination can reveal patterns and spots of fly defecation. The presence of a fly is indicated by dark swiping patterns (defecation) mingled among the tiny blood droplets. Houseflies are suckers and lappers, not biters like horseflies, and that lapping action creates small craters in dried blood spatters. The craters are proof of fly activity. A misidentification of this false spatter can lead investigators to incorrect conclusions about the course of events that occurred at a crime scene.Murderers have been known to try to cover their tracks by hiding and destroying evidence. Blood evidence is no exception. They've tried to wash it away, scrub it away, remove contaminated carpeting and bedding, paint over the stains, and even burn it away.When an investigator feels strongly that a murder's been committed and he can't locate any of the usual blood evidence, he turns to Luminol for help. Luminol is a chemical that reacts with blood — specifically, the iron that's found in hemoglobin.When the chemical comes into contact with blood, it causes the blood to luminesce with a bright, blue-green glow that can be seen in a dark room with the naked eye. Luminol is so sensitive that it reacts to one drop of blood in a container filled with 999,999 drops of water.The use of Luminol by investigators at crime scenes can not only show that there's human blood at the scene, but it can also point to where within the scene the victim was attacked. It can show the direction of the force of impact; what type of weapon was used — a knife, blunt instrument, or gun; the direction the suspect was standing or walking (traces of bloody footprints); and the direction in which the suspect dragged or carried the victim.As with other chemical agents used by law enforcement officers, Luminol has some drawbacks — it can mar or destroy other trace evidence, and it reacts to other materials, such as horseradish, copper, and some common household bleaches. However, the glow produced by Luminol's contact with blood is quite a bit brighter than the glow it generates when in contact with other substances. Detectives should always conduct all other investigations before they employ the use of Luminol.The glow produced by Luminol's contact with blood last only for a few minutes, so investigators should photograph the tested areas as soon as possible for later reference.EDGED WEAPONSEdged weapons are some of the earliest weapons known to mankind. Most people think only of knives when they talk about edged weapons, but the category also includes axes, razors, hatchets, scalpels, and swords. In fact, any item that can be sharpened or honed is considered an edged weapon.A good knife blade is easily sharpened, doesn't rust, and polishes well. The steel used for a high-quality knife blade is high-carbon steel with a high-chrome content, such as 440C, a type of steel that's capable of achieving a maximum hardness.An ax can deliver blunt trauma as well as the lacerations associated with any other edged weapon. It also can be responsible for torn flesh.Wounds caused by edged weapons can have more stopping power than a firearm. One important thing for a detective to remember is that a knife never runs out of ammunition. Attackers have the ability to strike again and again and again.Knives of all types are carried by a large number of street criminals as weapons of self-defense or aggression. Many assaults and robberies are carried out by knife-wielding suspects, and the damage inflicted by those knives can be deadly.Unlike gunshot wounds that are sometimes so small the extreme heat seals the hole, a knife wound can be deep enough to cut large muscles, bones, internal organs, arteries, and veins — all from a single slash.A knife attack by a suspect can come as a complete surprise. Knife attacks are silent, giving no warning. There's no identifiable sound, like that of a gunshot. Quite often an attacker will approach her prey, stab him, and walk away before the victim has the time to react. Assailants can easily conceal almost any size knife.Some attackers stab their victims a multitude of times. Either way, the wounds are usually inflicted quickly, sometimes without the victim ever seeing the weapon. Even if a victim is aware that the attacker has a knife, it's still difficult to defend against a knife attack. The blows are usually delivered in a hammer-type strike — either a downward stab or a diagonal slashing. A lunging stab is a favored method of street fighters.Officers are trained to pay particular attention to the direction of the cuts. The type of wound can show the investigator a possible positioning of the suspect and victim when the attack occurred. For instance, a blade entering the flesh at less than a right angle makes a beveled wound. A blade piercing the flesh at a right angle creates an oval wound. A twisting of the knife blade as it penetrates the flesh creates a scrimmage wound.Defensive wounds are often found on the palms and forearms of the victim of an edged-weapon attack. When attacked, a human's natural instinct is to put her arms and hands between her face and the attacker's weapon. This action causes the initial blows to be dealt to those unprotected body parts. Defensive wounds can also be found on the arms and hands of gunshot victims.People who are contemplating suicide often attempt to do so by cutting or slashing their wrists with knives or razor blades. Sometimes it takes the person several attempts before he gets enough nerve to make deep enough cut. The shallow “practice” cuts are called hesitation cuts.ENTOMOLOGY OR INSECT EVIDENCEAll too often, patrol officers, detectives, and emergency personnel accidentally destroy some of the most important evidence at a crime scene. During the examination of a body, I've seen emergency medical personnel and other detectives wipe away maggots and wave flies away in disgust. These insects can be important determinants of the time of death, and it's essential that the detective and medical examiner make note of and collect samples of each individual species found on or around the body.The presence of blowflies and/or houseflies indicates a body is in the first stage of death, the fresh or recently deceased stage. These large, green or black flies are usually first to arrive and lay their eggs in open wounds or cavities and in places such as the eyes, ears, nose, penis, and vaginal openings.During the examination of the body as evidence, it's important to note the presence of other insects other than those directly on the body. There may be ants darting about, carrying away live maggots, or there may be wasps feeding on the flies.The fresh stage of the body begins to attract the first insects approximately ten minutes after death, depending on the climate and weather conditions.After a period of time, the body will enter the second stage, the bloated stage, in which gases build up inside the body cavity as a result of decomposition. Live bacteria feeding on human tissue cause the decomposition. Maggots, during their feeding, also contribute to the decomposition and speed up the process. The presence of maggots is key to determining the time of death. During the decomposition stage, the body temperature can be elevated to temperatures much higher than when the body was alive. The temperatures can rise to points exceeding 120° F.It's important for the detective to note the ambient air temperature when a body's discovered. Should the temperature be below the point that maggots prefer to exist, the insects will move to a warmer location inside the body to protect themselves from the elements and will continue to feed. A body found outside, and decomposed only on the inside, indicates the presence of maggots inside the body during cold winter months. The insects use the body as a shelter from the elements and feed on the corpse, from the inside, until only a hull, or thin shell of skin, surrounds the skeletal remains.When approaching an outdoor murder scene, a detective must do so cautiously. I preferred to begin my search for insect activity, relative to the victim, at a distance of approximately thirty feet from the victim. In the third stage of decomposition, the decay stage, maggots will depart from the body and seek shelter under leaves or plant material. At this point, the investigator should begin to, literally, leave no stone unturned. I have often seen large black and/or green beetles crawling in and out of body cavities and on the surface of the body as well.Immediately following the decay stage is the post-decay stage, and the insect most often found on the body at this point is the beetle. Keep in mind, there may still be other insects lingering as well, but the beetle is the predominant one.The final stage is obvious. It's the skeletal stage, and only insects that live in the earth will feed upon these remains. Detectives should obtain soil samples from beneath the body; it's a good rule of thumb to sample the earth surrounding the body up to three to four feet away.I have observed different methods of collecting insects at murder scenes. Different investigators use different methods, but the end result must be the same. One particular detective I recall used a net designed for skimming pool water to sweep through the air and collect flying insects. It looked a bit silly but was very effective. Officers should collect samples of live, crawling insects, place them into containers filled with local material or sand, and then transport them immediately to a lab for testing.Lack of insects on or in a body can be a sign of freezing. The killer may have kept the body in a freezer and later moved it to the location where it was discovered.The soil above a buried body may provide clues as well. Certain moths burrow into freshly loosened soil, and they're indicators of a fresh grave.Killers sometimes go to great lengths to disguise the time and method of death, but wrapping the body in plastics bags, rugs, drums, or other containers doesn't prevent insect penetration and activity.During the course of a criminal investigation, a detective may need to know the content of the victim's stomach. The deceased's last meal may indicate evidence of a particular restaurant, or, more importantly, the presence of a poison may indicate the cause of death.As the body deteriorates and decomposes, body organs and fluids become unattainable, making testing impossible. The presence of maggots and their cast-aside shells revives the probability of obtaining the needed information. A scientist can trace chemical compounds from the victim within the bodies of the maggots. Testing on maggots has proven to be quite effective and has produced findings of chemicals such as heroin, cocaine, amitriptyline, mercury, and phenobarbital, to name a few.
