---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0020_split_001.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["inmate", "prison", "prisoner", "officer", "time", "jail", "federal", "one", "state", "may", "must", "many", "cell", "facility", "staff", "co", "allowed", "inside", "use", "day", "also", "area", "system", "two", "outside"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0020split001html

---


13
PRISONS AND JAILSJails and prisons are complicated places with all the problems of the outside world, magnified by the pressure every human being feels at the loss of liberty. Writers setting a story inside should start in their own imagination, with the inability to make even the most mundane choices — what to wear, what to eat, how long to stay in the shower — for themselves. And then, make it worse.— LESLIE BUDEWITZ, AUTHOR OF LAW AND FICTION: A LAWYER ANSWERS LEGAL QUESTIONS FOR MYSTERY WRITERSPrisons and jails are crowded. They're bursting at the seams with inmates and there seems to be no solution to the rising rate of incarceration. Each year, the U.S. Department of Justice releases a report detailing the exact number of post-conviction criminal offenders who are currently making their way through the criminal justice system. The 2005 year-end report tells a sad tale.In the United States, one out of every thirty-two people is either in prison or on probation or parole. Nearly 2.2 million people — a 2.7 percent increase over the year 2004 — were serving time in a jail or prison at the end of 2005, and that number is growing with each passing day.The close of 2005 saw more than four million people on probation and another 784,208 men and women on parole. When these figures are broken down by ethnicity, the numbers are even more alarming. For example, the report shows that one out of every thirteen African-American males between the ages of twenty-five and twenty-nine is currently serving time in an American prison.There's also an increase in the number of women, many of them single mothers, incarcerated each year. Hand-in-hand with that rising incarceration rate is the growing number of children who are left behind and forced to live with family members, or they're placed in foster care while their mothers and fathers serve their sentences.Today's prisons and jails sometimes house thousands of inmates, and they offer much more than just a cell, a bed, and three meals. These mega-institutions are like small, self-contained cities capable of making their own furniture, baking their own bread, and raising their own food sources, such as cows, pigs, and vegetables. They manufacture clothing and shoes. Some institutions even train and utilize their prisoners to fight wildfires deep in remote areas of California.Inmates are required to participate in substance abuse programs if drugs or alcohol contributed to, or was a part of, the commission of their crimes.PRISONS VS. JAILSThose who are incarcerated serve their sentences behind the walls of two main types of corrections facilities — prisons and jails. A person convicted of a felony must normally serve one or more years in a state or federal prison, and a person convicted of a misdemeanor is usually sentenced to twelve or fewer months in a county jail. The two types of inmates aren't usually housed together, although there are exceptions to that rule in the case of extreme jail and prison overcrowding. Prisoners who are waiting to be transferred to state prison are held in county jails until a bed becomes available at the prison that's been designated for them by the state.Separate federal prisons also exist to house criminals who are convicted of federal offenses (crimes against U.S. law), such as drug offenses, treason, and terrorism — these facilities are all prisons (not jails) and house only felons. A sheriff operates most county and city jails; the state government runs state prisons; and the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) supervises federal facilities. Occasionally, in rural areas, several towns and counties join together and operate one multi-jurisdictional jail called a regional jail. The sheriff and chief of police from each of the regions serve as board members for the regional jail. These board members in turn hire and supervise a jail administrator who's responsible for the day-to-day operations of the facility.An offender who's convicted of a crime normally serves his time in an institution located within the area where the original crime took place. The exception to this rule is when an offender is convicted of a federal crime. Federal inmates may be required to serve their time at any one of the federal prisons located in the United States. Federal Bureau of Prisons officials make every attempt to incarcerate their prisoners within five hundred miles of the inmate's hometown so they may maintain contact and visit with family members.People who commit federal crimes are sentenced according to mandatory-minimum guidelines. A federal judge must impose a sentence (juries decide a particular sentence, but a judge imposes the sentence) within the range specified by those guidelines, but she may not dole out punishment outside of those limitations without an extremely good reason, such as in the case of an offender's diminished mental capacity, or in the instance where an offender has provided substantial assistance to the government as an informant.If extenuating conditions exist whereby a federal judge feels a sentence reduction is warranted for a medical reason, the offender may be ordered to serve all or part of his time in a facility that specializes in that condition, such as the Federal Medical Center in Lexington, Kentucky, or the U.S. Medical Center for Federal Prisoners (MCFP) in Springfield, Missouri.The MCFP specializes in the treatment and care of prisoners who are in need of mental health services and medical and dental treatment. Since there are a limited number of these special federal medical facilities, prisoners who are in need of their services may be transferred several hundred miles away from the cities and towns where their family members reside.It's interesting to note that all crimes occurring within the city limits of Washington, D.C., may be considered federal crimes since the city isn't geographically located within a state. Offenders who commit crimes within the boundaries of the District may be tried in federal court and sentenced accordingly.Let's further examine the two types of institutions, county jails and prisons.COUNTY JAILSA county jail serves three purposes: to house inmates who have been convicted of minor crimes (misdemeanors); to hold recently convicted felons until a bed becomes available in the state prison where they've been designated to serve their time; and to hold non-convicted criminals who are awaiting trial.Serving time in a county jail is quite a bit different than serving a sentence in a state prison. Sometimes county jails are more overcrowded than state prisons. County jails are also normally smaller than prisons; therefore, they sometimes offer less in the way of services and programs for inmates.A sheriff is the highest-ranking official in most county jails. Second in command is the chief deputy followed by a jail administrator, the person who oversees the day-to-day functions and activities of all jail operations. The deputy sheriffs working inside county jails are called corrections officers or corrections deputies. Their duties and training are similar to that of corrections officers in state and federal prisons.COUNTY JAIL CELLSCounty jail cell.A good number of county jails are outdated, understaffed, overpopulated, and underfunded. They feature cells and lockup facilities with poor or nonworking plumbing, inadequate lighting, dark hallways, and many blind corners that are dangerous for both the staff and the inmates. Cells are often infested with rats and roaches, and uncooperative or unruly prisoners are often beaten, pepper-sprayed, and shot with Tasers, beanbags, or stun guns.Cells are often not cleaned between the release of one inmate and the reception of another. New arrivals are sometimes forced to sleep on floors littered with feces, urine, vomit, and matted human and rodent hair.Prisoners don't always have ready access to cleaning supplies. On one occasion I overheard a new prisoner asking a jail officer (a deputy sheriff) for supplies to clean his cell of feces and vomit left behind by a former prisoner. The deputy handed the inmate a washcloth through the bars and gave him the choice of using his one and only washcloth to either wash his body or to clean the floor.OVERCROWDING ISSUESLike their larger counterparts, state and federal prisons, county jails are overcrowded. Some jails are filled to two and three times their capacity and simply can't hold even one additional prisoner; therefore, they must request that a neighboring county hold prisoners for them. If a sheriff is asked to house an inmate from another jurisdiction, the sheriff is entitled by law to receive payment from that agency for housing the inmate. The cost to house a prisoner from another jurisdiction in the state of Ohio for the year 2006 was approximately sixty dollars a day.The overcrowding of jails and prisons has become such an issue that many county sheriffs have learned to be quite creative when it comes to finding bed space for prisoners. Some sheriffs have made the decision to release some low-risk, minor offenders from jail before the completion of their sentences. Sheriff Gene A. Kelly of Ohio looked to an unlikely place for the solution to his overcrowding problem — container ships and oil rigs.When the sheriff learned that workers on stationary oil rigs located in the Gulf of Mexico slept in compartments fashioned from large, metal shipping containers that had been converted into living quarters, he decided to explore the possibility of converting those containers into portable jail cells. He found the containers to be a perfect solution for jail overcrowding.Each of the heavy, metal containers is ten feet wide by forty feet long, which allows ample space for inmate sleeping quarters, shower and restroom areas, and a dayroom area for ten inmates. The containers are equipped with heat and air-conditioning, lockable windows and doors, fluorescent lighting, tile floors, sheetrock walls, and bunk beds. The cost of each fully equipped container is just over thirty thousand dollars, a fraction of the cost to build new jail cells.Interior living quarters of a jail pod.Sheriff Kelly converted the lower floor of a multilevel parking garage into a jail annex by purchasing and installing seven of the fully equipped shipping containers that he now calls jail pods. He had contractors surround the entire garage area with heavy-duty chain-link fence. The area outside and in between the pods is large enough for a recreation yard equipped with basketball equipment and picnic tables. The entire area is so secure that only one corrections deputy is needed to supervise, and he does so from outside the fence. Should trouble occur on the inside of this mini-compound, other deputies would be summoned to assist.SERVICES PROVIDEDMost jails have at least one nurse on duty at all times, but many jails are large enough to justify employing an entire medical staff. Some even have fully equipped dental facilities and X-ray equipment. Smaller county jails don't have the budget for a full-time doctor and employ a local doctor on a part-time basis.County jails offer religious services to inmates, but most don't have full-time chaplains. These facilities often rely on local churches and religious organizations to provide spiritual activities and material. They also rely on civic organizations for other needs, such as Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous.SECURITY MEASURESTo prevent illegal activities such as assaults, rape, drug use, gambling, and possible suicide, corrections deputies are required to visit each area of the jail facility several times during their shifts. To ensure that the deputies are making their rounds properly and are checking on each and every inmate within the facility, some jails employ the use of a device they call a pipe.The pipe is a handheld metal device that's carried by all deputies working inside the jail. The device is approximately eight inches in length and two inches in diameter and contains a small computerized recording mechanism. The tip of the pipe is actually an electronic receiver. Small round transmitters are mounted throughout the jail in areas such as cell doors, dayrooms, recreation areas, the library, medical offices, medical cells, kitchen areas, and shower areas.When the officers make their rounds, they touch the tip of the receiver portion of the pipe to the transmitters. The pipe then records the time that the officer was in that area. At the end of the officer's shift he inserts the pipe into a master receiver located inside the jail control room. The master receiver then downloads all of the day's data. This information allows jail administration to view the movements of each and every employee.PRISONSA defendant who receives a felony conviction in a state court and is sentenced to incarceration must serve his time in a state prison, not jail. Each state operates its own network of prisons, which is comprised of many different institutions, such as juvenile offender facilities and prisons for low, medium, and high-risk (maximum security) adult offenders. There are separate prisons for male and female prisoners.The U.S. government operates the Federal Bureau of Prisons, which is designed to house inmates who have been convicted of federal crimes. These prisons are located throughout the United States and its territories.PRISON SYSTEM CHAIN OF COMMANDThe overall day-to-day operations of prison facilities vary greatly from one area to another. These differences can be affected by cultural differences; geographical influences, such as climate and terrain; prison management styles and personalities; and even the mood and attitudes of the corrections staff. For example, a prison facility nestled within a community with deeply religious roots may offer more spiritual programs than facilities in other localities. Harsh winters in the New England states force inmates to remain indoors for many months. Close living conditions and a lack of sunshine and fresh air often cause short tempers to flare up.In institutions situated in the western states, hot, dry desert weather, with little or no rainfall, can also affect a prisoner's or staff member's temperament.The warden of a prison greatly influences the atmosphere of the institution he supervises. A warden who excelled in basketball or football in college may encourage a very active sports program at his institution. Another warden may despise sports and offer more support toward academia. A warden's religious beliefs have also been known to play a big part in how he runs his facility. Either way, prisons (state and federal) and jails (as described in the section regarding sheriff's offices) operate much like police agencies and the military, with a rank-and-file system. The warden is the chief officer of the institution, followed by her assistant wardens.The rest of the prison staff is divided between administrative services and security staff. On the administrative side are counselors, medical personnel, clerical staff, religious services, educational services, recreation services, buildings and grounds maintenance, captains, lieutenants, sergeants, corporals, and officers.The security staff operates under the supervision of the chief security officer, who normally holds the rank of major. The majors, in turn, supervise the rest of the security staff that includes captains (shift commanders), lieutenants, sergeants, corporals, and line officers. Security staff members are assigned to every location of the prison facility.FEDERAL VS. STATE PRISONSThe U.S. Department of Justice's Bureau of Justice Statistics reports that nearly 65 percent of federal prisons' population is comprised of low-and medium-security inmates and most of the federal prison system's prisoners — nearly 54 percent — are drug offenders. In the year 2006, only a little more than 14 percent of the federal prison population was incarcerated for weapons offenses; 5.4 percent for robbery; 3.1 percent for homicide, rape, and kidnapping; 2.3 percent for sex crimes; and a scant 0.1 percent of the prison population is serving time for crimes against our national security. The majority of sentences for offenders range between five and ten years in length.The end of 2005 saw nearly 1.25 million inmates in state prisons throughout the country. An estimated 650,000 were serving time for committing violent crimes, including rape and murder, while just over 250,000 were incarcerated for drug offenses. Another 262,000 were behind bars for property crimes such as larceny.There's a sharp contrast in the prison population by ethnicity. The male African-American prison population in 2005 was 3,145 inmates per 100,000 African- American males in the United States, while the white prison population was 471 inmates per 100,000 white males in the United States. There were 1,244 Hispanic males per 100,000 male Hispanics in the United States.State prisoners are forced to serve their time in the jurisdiction where they committed their crimes. Federal prisoners serve their time in federal prisons within five hundred miles of their homes. Since they're sometimes incarcerated too far away for family members to visit, they're given the opportunity to transfer to prisons closer to their homes. Before they can apply for a transfer to another facility they must complete an orientation period, which instructs new prisoners about what they can expect during their incarceration. Some prison orientation periods last for one or two days while others may last for a few months. State prisoners aren't normally given an opportunity to transfer to other prisons.U.S. Marshals normally transport federal prisoners who have been granted a transfer; however, in some cases prison officials may grant the inmate a “furlough transfer” where he's allowed to check out of prison and catch a bus, plane, or a ride with a family member or friend to the newly designated facility. This procedure is used quite often.Some inmates are also granted brief furloughs to attend the funerals of family members or to receive hospital care or surgery. Some federal inmates even qualify for a furlough they can use just to go home for a period of up to three days. These furloughs are granted to a prisoner when he's nearing the end of his sentence. The prisoner's time at home is supposed to be used to reestablish family ties and to possibly line up post-incarceration employment.When furloughs are granted for medical reasons, the costs for the medical procedures must be paid for by the inmate. The same is true for the costs incurred for a furlough transfer — the inmate or his family is required to pay all costs.To qualify for this short amount of freedom, the inmate must be a model, low custody, nonviolent inmate who poses no risk for escape or harm to others. Of course, there have been instances where inmates have committed murder or failed to report to their new prisons while on furlough.PRIVATELY RUN PRISONSFederal and state prisons are operated with tax dollars and are a huge burden on government budgets. To ease the rising cost of prison operation, corrections officials of all levels have begun to utilize privately run facilities. Currently there are nearly twelve thousand federal inmates in such privately run prisons.There's a stark contrast between state and federally operated prisons and the facilities that are privately run (the prisons for profit). Private institutions are in the business of making money and, like any business, the companies want to turn a profit. To do so, they must cut corners and save money by any means possible. These cuts sometime mean a reduction in staff, food and food quality, and medical care.Prisoners are sometimes poorly fed and packed into tiny 5′ × 8′ cells with bunk beds sometimes stacked three high. Three or more prisoners now occupy spaces originally designed to house one.CORRECTIONS OFFICERSCorrections officers, or Cos, work in prisons and jails. They generally receive less training and equipment to do a job that's equally as important as, and often more dangerous than, the job of a police officer who works the streets. Yet Cos are expected to supervise the day-to-day lives of some of the most incorrigible human beings on the face of the earth. Ellen Proffitt, a former state corrections officer, said of her experience:Working in a maximum security prison is demanding to say the least, especially for female officers working in an all-male facility. There's not a worse feeling in the world than hearing the clang of the steel doors as they lock behind you. That's when the realization hits that you are surrounded and outnumbered by dangerous inmates, two hundred to one. They could take over at any given time. It's frightening if you stop to think about it. I tried not to.The position of a CO is thankless, dangerous, stressful, and often demeaning; therefore, the job turnover rate among prison security staff is quite high. There are other reasons for the high turnover rate: Some new officers simply can't handle being behind locked steel doors with hundreds of dangerous felons.New officers sometimes become frightened or claustrophobic after a few hours of being behind the fences and walls and don't even finish their first day on the job. Many prison Cos leave their jobs with the corrections departments to become police officers after using the prison system as a sort of stepping stone into the police business.Some people feel the move from prison guard to police officer is a natural transition; however, many police officers don't feel this way about their prison guard counterparts and don't readily accept them into their fold. Some police officers feel that prison Cos are inferior to them. In fact, many feel that the Cos are working in a prison because they couldn't get a job with a “real” police department. Those officers feel that many of the Cos are just cop wannabes.These feelings of animosity may be due to the fact that prison Cos don't have arrest powers and receive a different type of training that's not as intense or lengthy as police officer training. No how matter unjust or petty the reason, the feelings are there.On the other side of the coin are the feelings of Cos who make a valid point when they speak about the negative attitudes shown toward them by police officers. They feel that their jobs are equally as important, and rightly so. Police officers only have to deal with a violent offender for a few minutes — from the time of arrest until they tuck the crook safely away in a jail cell. Prison staff members must deal with that same offender, without restraints and surrounded by his gang buddies, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. Each job has its own set of stressors, and each job is equally important. Still, the transition from CO to police officer is often a difficult one.When a CO resigns or is out sick, his vacancy can create a hazardous situation. Prison officials can't allow any positions to remain vacant. When an officer quits, the administration must immediately hire someone to replace that person. Until the position is filled, staff members from other areas or shifts are called on to handle the job. In many instances this means that someone will have to work a double shift. This also occurs when someone calls in sick. Many prisons have a “draft” system in place to ensure that all positions are filled at all times.The draft system works from a list of names of all employees on each shift. When an officer calls in sick at the last minute, a supervisor selects the name of the person on the outgoing shift who's next on the draft list. The selected person is required to fill the vacancy that's left by the sick employee from the oncoming shift, meaning that drafted person will have to work for sixteen hours, nonstop. He's also expected to return to work for his regularly scheduled shift the following day.The draft system fills empty slots with warm bodies; however, the officers who work the draft are unprepared for the long hours and are often quite exhausted before their second eight-hour tour of duty is complete. It's important for security staff to remain alert at all times to prevent potentially dangerous situations from occurring. Unfortunately, exhaustion doesn't allow for a CO to remain as attentive as she could be, and an observant inmate with escape or murder on his mind could easily take advantage of the situation.In order to keep the prison staffed at full capacity, the hiring process must sometimes be hurried. The incessant need to fill vacant officer positions can cause another type of security risk: hiring people who aren't quite suitable for the job.Along with the haste of hiring comes an increase in the ratio of less-than-desirable security staff supervising inmates of above-average intelligence. This doesn't make for a good mix. The lesser-qualified officers are sometimes more easily influenced or duped into problem situations by the streetwise and highly educated inmates of today. This same employment problem can be found in almost any business, but when it occurs within a prison system the results can be deadly.CORRECTIONS OFFICER TRAININGPrison officials attempt to thwart the many problems they encounter by providing top-of-the-line training with highly skilled instructors, equipment, and training facilities. In some states, newly hired corrections officers attend a training academy where they're required to stay onsite throughout their training period. The length of training depends on the area or state. The state of Virginia, for example, requires their officers to attend a four-week basic certification course followed by a one-week follow-up class that's held after they've been on the job for six months. Every year thereafter they're required to attend a one-week in-service training class where they're updated on all new laws and security techniques.A prison's staff operates much like a police agency, paramilitary style, so Cos must undergo a boot camp-styled training regime. Newly hired Cos attend corrections academies where they divide their time between classroom and hands-on training.During the classroom training portion officers learn about the many cultural backgrounds and lifestyles of inmate populations. They learn how to identify potentially problematic situations; to properly implement crisis intervention and employee conflict management techniques; how to enforce laws and institutional rules and regulations; how to properly supervise prisoners; how to identify drugs and drug use by inmates; how to properly secure a crime scene; and how to handle evidence and other contraband.Officers receive intensive hands-on training on handcuffing and other restraint device techniques, physical fitness training, military drills, riot squad formations and techniques, use of chemical agents and weapons, defensive tactics, use of batons, and cell searches.Firearms TrainingLike their police officer counterparts, Cos are required to be proficient with firearms; however, the firearms training that's taught to Cos is geared toward their specific need for weapons. Cos are permitted to use deadly force to prevent the escape of inmates, and officers must learn to shoot various weapons from different vantage points in and around the institution. Corrections facilities don't allow firearms inside the institutions with the exception of those with secure gun turrets. These turrets allow Cos to stop riots and quell officer-down emergencies. Firearms are normally carried by Cos when they're transporting prisoners to and from court and medical appointments, or in gun and observation towers and on patrol of the prison perimeter.During their firearms training sessions, most Cos are taught to use revolvers or semiautomatic pistols, twelve-gauge shotguns, and rifles. They're taught how to disassemble, clean, and reassemble each firearm they're authorized to carry while on duty. The handgun carried by most Cos is a .38 caliber revolver. Revolvers are the weapon of choice within most corrections systems because they're less expensive than semiautomatics and Cos aren't normally faced with using deadly force on armed subjects; therefore, large numbers of bullets aren't needed.Many prisons issue twelve-gauge pump-type shotguns similar to those carried by police officers. Automatic shotguns have a tendency to jam whereas pump shotguns don't under normal conditions.The shotgun chosen for official use by most corrections and police agencies is the Remington 870 Wingmaster. Police officers prefer to use an eighteen-inch barrel on their 870s because most of their shooting situations are at close range. Cos prefer a shotgun with a barrel length of eighteen to twenty inches for use during riots situations and a twenty-six-inch barrel for use on manhunts and road gang supervision. The lengthier barrel is much more accurate at longer distances than the short one. A shotgun with a full-length barrel can be fired accurately at distance of forty to sixty yards.The ammunition used by Cos in their shotguns varies. If the guns are used in riot situations, they're loaded with #8 bird shot. In situations where the officers are attempting to stop a fleeing inmate or are using the weapon to stop a prisoner's deadly assault on officers, they'd possibly load the shotgun with #4 buckshot. Shells loaded with buckshot have fewer pellets than those loaded with bird shot, but buckshot pellets are much larger. Bird shot is used in riot situations to quell a potentially dangerous situation. Buckshot is used stop an escaping inmate even if stopping him means killing him.In addition to firing shotguns at silhouette targets, Cos are expected to demonstrate efficiency in skip shooting. Skip shooting is the technique used to fire shotgun shell pellets at the legs of inmates during riot situations. The purpose of this technique is to subdue, not kill.To perform the skip shooting technique, Cos point their shotguns in the direction of the rioting prisoners, but downward at an angle toward the pavement, and then fire. The pellets immediately begin to spread out and, while ricocheting off the pavement, strike several prisoners at once. The technique doesn't require the CO to take the time to aim. When practicing skip shooting at the range, officers use full-size targets.Some corrections departments conduct their own firearms training, such as the Clark County Sheriff's office in Ohio. The sheriff's office in that southwestern county maintains a state-of-the-art indoor firing range manufactured by Mancom Manufacturing Incorporated of Canada. The range features self-healing tiles on each side wall, chunk-rubber backstops angled at thirty-seven degrees, electronic target retrieval systems, and elaborate lighting and exhaust systems. The entire range can be operated from within a control booth enclosed with bulletproof glassThe range's lighting system is capable of simulating daytime and nighttime firing conditions as well as replicating situations where officers must shoot while strobe and rotating lights are flashing, such as inside nightclubs and in the light of their police vehicle light bars.Strobe lights tend to give the impression that a stationary object, such as a suspect, is moving from side to side. Practice under these conditions could mean the difference between life and death for a police officer.The wall tiles in the range can be shot straight-on from close range and the material heals instantly, leaving hardly a trace where the rounds entered. The tile material is so tough it's capable of receiving and stopping rounds of up to .50 caliber military machine gun. This is a unique range system because it features 360-degree target presentation, meaning that officers are able to fire in all directions, like they would have to do in real-life situations. The system is so impressive and advanced that it's used by the FBI Academy, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Advanced Training Center, and the Drug Enforcement Administration.The range didn't come cheap, but during President Clinton's administration the government released federal grant money for law enforcement agencies to aid them in the war against drugs. The Clark County Sheriff's Office purchased their indoor range for approximately $320,000, with a good deal of that money coming from the government grant.Most corrections institutions are surrounded by high fences or walls with towers strategically placed around the perimeter of the prison, providing officers a bird's-eye view of all activities. Officers in the towers are issued rifles due to the possibility of having to stop escaping and rioting inmates from great distances.While firing ranges like the Mancom ranges are invaluable when it comes to firearms training, they're not equipped to allow Cos the opportunity to practice firing from different elevations. Therefore, many corrections academies have built towers on their outdoor ranges to allow officers the opportunity to practice rifle fire.The types of rifles used by prison staff throughout the country vary. Many of the nation's prisons prefer the AR-15 semiautomatic rifle, the civilian version of the military's M16 rifle manufactured by Colt. The Colt rifle weighs less than eight pounds and fires a .223 caliber round accurately at distances up to five hundred yards — the length of five football fields.Another popular rifle for use in corrections is the Ruger Mini-14, a three-foot-long, six-pound workhorse of a rifle. The Mini-14 is a little less accurate than the AR-15 but is an extremely reliable rifle mechanically.Both rifles are capable of holding magazines containing many rounds of ammunition, but most prison policies require that five-round magazines be used.Officers must practice firing these rifles quite a bit because of the various locations they could be shooting from. It's much more difficult to shoot accurately from an elevated position, such as a tower or catwalk, than on flat ground.Cos practice their shooting skills with all weapons in both day and nighttime conditions. To graduate from the academy, officers must qualify on the firing range with a score of 70 percent.Upon successful completion of the basic officer's academy, the new Cos are outfitted with little more than a can of pepper spray and a set of keys. Then they're immediately assigned to work one of three shifts: day, evening, or graveyard.THE PRISONER's JOURNEYA defendant becomes a prisoner immediately after a judge imposes a prison sentence. He's usually held in the county jail until a cell or bed becomes available in the prison where he's been assigned to serve his sentence. As soon as a bed is available he's transferred from the county jail to prison.NEW INMATE ARRIVALState prisoners are normally delivered to prison by deputy sheriffs from the county where the prisoner was convicted of her crimes; however, most nonviolent federal offenders are allowed to self-surrender to prison. As odd as this sounds, rarely does an offender not show up when and where she's supposed to. In the event that someone doesn't report to federal prison, she's considered an escapee and is immediately placed on the U.S. Marshal's “Wanted” list.Sometimes, even after they've been found guilty and sentenced, the future federal inmates are allowed to return to their homes to get their affairs in order perhaps take care of a doctor's appointment or undergo surgery prior to reporting to their designated institution. This period could last for as short as a few days or for as long as several months, depending on the reason.Under normal circumstances deputies deliver state prisoners to a reception center where the new inmate will be processed and receive an orientation to life in prison. U.S. Marshals are responsible for the transporting of federal prisoners.It's a quite an eye-opening experience for the first-time prisoner when the police transportation van or car rounds the final turn leading to the prison (prisons are often at the end of a long, long road traveled only by those who have business with the prison). The first look at prison offers a view of massive concrete buildings surrounded by miles of high fences topped with looping wire tipped with thousands upon thousands of glimmering razors. If the sun catches those razors just right, and if you're far enough away, they give the appearance of diamonds floating in the air above the fences. If you're standing close to the fence, you can hear the wind causing the razors to vibrate and hum. A really hard wind makes the wobbling razor wire whistle. It's a constant nerve-wracking song that never ends.As the driver gets closer, his prisoner catches his first glimpse of the rifle-toting officers who man the towers around the perimeter. The officers normally step outside onto their catwalks to see who's driving toward them. The tower officers are the first line of defense against intruders and the last line of defense against escapes and hostage situations. It's their main duty to stop either.Tower officers never know who may be paying a visit. It could be someone coming to instigate an escape, or it could be a high-profile state official. Either way, they'll call inside to warn the appropriate people. No surprise visitors, friend or foe, ever make it inside a corrections facility.Peering outside the window of the car, the prisoner is now close enough to see the various groups of inmates outside in the recreation yard. Many are walking laps around the track while others play basketball or soccer. Since weightlifting has been banned from most institutions, several inmates can be seen bench pressing two pebble-or sand-filled laundry bags that are tied to either end of a mop handle. (Weightlifting and martial arts were banned to prevent prisoners from having a physical advantage over officers during altercations).Most of the inmates pause to see the new arrival as the deputies turn and park in front of the prison entrance. They're sizing him up, and he knows it. This is where reality normally strikes the prisoner. The prisoner's fear is often evident by nervous chatter and forced laughter, hard swallowing, and sometimes shedding a tear or two. It's not uncommon for a deputy to offer the prisoner a cigarette to calm his nerves. It may be his last chance for a smoke since most of today's prisons are nonsmoking facilities. Tobacco products are now on prison black market lists along with drugs, alcohol, and weapons.Guns aren't allowed inside prison walls by anyone other than officers inside caged gun turrets, so upon their arrival at the prison the deputies stop outside to lock their weapons in the trunk of their car. With their weapons secure, the deputies get back into their car and drive up to a set of double, fifteen-foot-high drive-through gates called a sally port. There, they're met by a CO who checks and verifies all paperwork regarding the newly arriving inmate. The sally port officer also has the responsibility of checking all vehicles belonging to vendors and maintenance workers.The sally port is the weakest spot in the prison's outer shell because the gates have to be opened each time a delivery is made. The prison is extremely vulnerable when the gates are open because inmates have a brief opportunity to escape. The proper procedure for the opening of sally port gates is to open only one gate at a time, allow one vehicle to drive inside, close the first gate, search the vehicle and its occupants, and then open the second gate, allowing the vehicle to drive onto the prison grounds. Nonemployee vendors are escorted to their destinations inside the institution by Cos.When the sally port officer is sure that all the paperwork is in order, he radios to a control room, which is usually located in a nearby tower, to have the first gate opened. The deputies drive inside and the first gate is closed behind them, locking them and the vehicle inside the sally port. Inside, Cos use mirrors attached to long poles to look beneath the car for secret compartments, items of contraband, and possible explosives. They also look inside the trunk and under the hood.The prisoner is asked to step outside the car, where deputies remove all restraints. He and his paperwork are turned over to corrections officials. The officials sign a receipt stating that they've received the prisoner and then escort the inmate inside the building. Once the officers have the inmate safely inside the reception center the doors are locked, the outside gate is once again opened, and the deputies are free to leave.The inmate is taken to a holding cell where he'll remain until he's processed. Processing a new prison inmate can take several hours, in some instances days, due to slowly arriving records or medical clearance. In some cases the prisoner may be problematic or suicidal. In many institutions, processing consists of strip-searching the new arrivals, medical evaluation, psychological evaluation, fingerprinting and photographing for inmate ID cards, and classification for the purpose of determining custody status. Some facilities require delousing, where the inmate is given a small cup of shampoo containing chemicals such as piperonyl butoxide and pyrethrum extract. In those facilities the inmate is ordered to shower and wash his scalp with the special shampoo. Officers watch to make certain the procedure was followed as ordered.At some point during the reception and orientation process new inmates are issued prison clothing, which normally consists of three white T-shirts, three pairs of white boxer shorts, three pairs of white socks, three institutional shirts, three pairs of institutional pants, and a pair of work boots. Inmates wishing to purchase any additional items of clothing, such as new underwear, may do so through the prison commissary once they leave the reception center and have been assigned to regular housing within the prison. To prevent inmates from blending in with prison staff and leaving the institution undetected, possession of regular street clothing by prisoners isn't permitted.Many institutions segregate all new inmates until an orientation program has been successfully completed. Orientation teaches inmates prison rules and regulations and the consequences of not adhering to those policies. New inmates are also schooled about life in prison and what to expect during their time behind bars. Each inmate is assigned an ID number that will be used throughout his incarceration. The number prevents future mix-ups between two or more prisoners having the same name. All inmates are required to memorize their prison ID numbers.All prisoners must work during their incarceration, so department heads sometimes attend orientation programs to explain the various prison job assignments. Some of the jobs available to inmates are carpentry, plumbing, painting, gardening and landscaping, electrical, automobile maintenance, janitorial services, cooking, dishwashing, warehouse labor, shipping and receiving clerk, tool room clerk, timekeeper, record keeper, chapel clerk, librarian, classroom instructor, recreation clerk, and cell block or dormitory orderly. Prisoners are allowed to apply for the job of their choice if there's an opening. Inmates who aren't qualified or don't fit into any these job categories may be assigned to menial chores.Inmates are classified according to the length of their sentence, security and escape risk potential, educational level, social skills (ability to get along with others), and their medical and psychological well-being. The classification systems vary from state to state, but they're all similar in nature. Some systems prefer to use numerical rankings while others use alphabetical ranking systems.Level one or “A” custody inmates are at the bottom of the classification system, meaning they pose the least amount of threat to staff members and other inmates. Inmates who are classified at the lower end of the scale may also receive less supervision. At the top of the classification system are level four or “D” custody inmates. Higher-level inmates are possible escape risks and potentially violent. They're never left alone or unescorted. In the federal prison system, nearly 65 percent of the population is comprised of low-and medium-security inmates, and most — 54 percent — are nonviolent drug offenders. The majority of sentences for offenders range between five and ten years in length.Prisons are built with those custody-status levels in mind. The Supermax prisons, such as the U.S. Penitentiary in Marion, Illinois, and the U.S. Penitentiary Administrative Maximum Facility in Florence, Colorado, were designed and built to house the worst of the worst. We'll take a closer look at these prisons.With the classification and orientation complete, inmates are assigned to housing units according to their custody status. Prison administrators attempt to keep all similarly classified inmates together. Inmates are also sometimes transferred from reception centers to other institutions that may be more suitable to particular custody statuses. For example, a physically handicapped in mate may need to be transferred to a facility with areas that are more handicapped accessible.A homemade weapon made from a sharpened nail and electrical tape.LIFE INSIDEPrison life is tough. Don't let the rumors of Club Fed-type prisons fool you. There are some institutions such as prison camps that are a bit softer on inmates than others, but even in the best of situations, prison life isn't fun.Most prison populations are controlled by internal gangs, many of which still have strong connections with the outside world. Those gangs are led by inmates called generals or shot callers. The generals have subordinates who deliver their orders to the lowest level of inmates in the gang's chain of command, the soldiers. A prison gang's soldiers do the dirty work. They smuggle in drugs and alcohol and make weapons. They protect the generals and will kill other inmates and prison staff if the generals order them to. They don't question their orders because to do so would mean certain death for the inmate who refuses.A new inmate must learn the rules of all gangs in order to survive. He may not walk through an area that's been claimed by a gang, and he may not shower in a stall that's reserved by a gang. He must eat at certain tables in the dining hall; he can't use certain sports equipment; he can't speak directly to certain inmates; he must pay for protection; and he must never, ever tell on another inmate. Snitching almost always results in assault or death.INMATE DISCIPLINEIn addition to unwritten inmate rules, prisoners are required to learn a set of prison rules and regulations. Each inmate must obey these rules during her incarceration. Any violation of these rules can result in disciplinary action and even a loss of good time (time off their sentences for good behavior, called earned good time credit). These institutional rules are divided into categories according to their seriousness.The Virginia Department of Corrections, for example, lists its offenses in numerical categories. Offenses in the 100 series are the most serious of all offenses followed by the lesser groupings of the 200 series, 300 series, and the 400 series (work-release violations) of offenses.Offenses in the 100 series, such as escape, rioting, assault, narcotics possession, making sexual advances, and murder, are also considered street crimes, meaning that the offender can be charged and tried with the crime in an outside court of law.The 200 series contains offenses such as refusing to work and refusing to obey a direct order. Pretending to be sick, hiding, fighting, possessing money of any kind, and lying to a prison employee fall into this category.The 300 series contains minor offenses, such as failing to clean one's quarters, unexcused absence from school, and unauthorized use of prison tools and equipment.Some inmates are permitted to work regular jobs outside of the prison walls. This is a rare occurrence and is usually permitted only under a judge's order. Inmates who work outside jobs are normally working to pay outstanding debts such as child support and court fines. The 400 series contains offenses that apply to inmates on such work-release programs. Loss of employment, visiting a private residence, riding in a private vehicle without permission, and establishing a line of credit without permission are all violations of the 400 series of work-release rules.The “hole.”When staff members — including security personnel, doctors, nurses, librarians, teachers, administrative employees, etc. — find an inmate to be in violation of a prison rule, they fill out a disciplinary form, called a write-up or shot, and submit it to the current officer in charge (OIC). The OIC reviews the form, making sure it contains all pertinent information, such as the correct date, time, location of the offense, and a complete, detailed description of the offense. Missing or incorrect information could result in the charge getting dismissed at the internal hearing, so when the OIC determines that the form has been properly completed, it's submitted to a hearings officer, who sets a date to hear the case. A copy of the form along with notification of the hearing date is given to the inmate. Depending on the severity of the offense, inmates may be confined to an isolation cell until their hearing.The inmate may choose to have someone, either another inmate or a staff member, represent her as counsel during the hearing. In most cases, staff members decline to represent an inmate in these proceedings. Inmates aren't allowed to have attorneys represent them during an institutional hearing.The hearings are informal but allow each side to present evidence and witnesses on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearings officer makes a decision of guilt or innocence. If the finding is one of innocence, the charge is removed from the inmate's record. If the inmate is found to be guilty, the hearings officer must decide on a sentence.There are specific sentences that can be ordered for each group of offenses. With a guilty verdict stemming from a 100 series offense, an inmate can receive a loss of all or part of his earned good time, or he can be placed in isolation where he's stripped of all privileges and must remain on total lockdown in a cell isolated within a remote area of the prison. A cell such as this is called the “hole.” Inmates think of this as the ultimate punishment and try to avoid being placed there. The normal sentence to The Hole is one to fifteen days. Repeat offenders or violent inmates may remain in The Hole indefinitely.Minor offenses can result in the inmate losing telephone privileges or personal items, such as radios, televisions, or typewriters. Unruly inmates are sometimes restrained in the “chair.” The chair is equipped with nylon restraints that hold the inmate securely in place.An inmate's institutional record is a permanent record and may be viewed by his probation or parole officer once he's released from prison. An unfavorable record may cause the probation officer to watch a former inmate more closely than one who abided by all prison rules and regulations.The “chair.”No matter the consequences for committing offenses, inmates still attempt to do things against the rules and things that are illegal. To make the commission of these offenses a bit easier, many inmates try to find a staff member who may be willing to help them. They study individual employees, trying to learn their unique personalities and habits. They soon know which employees may be sympathetic to their wants and needs.Every day, they pick up tiny bits of information until they know which employees they can control and possibly use in some way. Unfortunately, it's most often an employee who brings dangerous contraband inside to the prisoners. officers have been caught smuggling in items ranging from food items and weapons, and they've even been caught allowing the prisoners to have sex. Some employees have even been caught having sex with inmates.CELLS AND DORMITORIESNot all prisons house their inmates in individual cells. Some of the lower-security prisons use a dormitory system where anywhere from a few dozen to more than one hundred inmates sleep in bunk beds inside one large, open room.Some prison dormitories are equipped with enclosed showers; sinks for shaving; instant hot water dispensers for coffee, soup, and hot chocolate; ice machines; laundry rooms equipped with washers, dryers, irons, and ironing boards; and a room containing microwaves where inmates can get pretty creative with recipes. They make nachos, burritos, spaghetti, meatloaf (with meat stolen from the kitchen), and various chicken dishes (again, with meat stolen from the kitchen). There are also small rooms for watching television as well as a large multipurpose room called a dayroom for playing cards and board games, and for watching special TV programs and movies.Certain groups of inmates normally take it upon themselves to claim each TV room. For example, a dormitory containing three separate TV rooms may be divided by race with Hispanics in one, African-Americans in another, and whites and other races in the third. It's considered a violation of inmate code for a person of a particular race or group to enter the TV room of another. Fights or death could be the result of such an intrusion. To keep the noise level at a minimum, televisions in most prison TV and dayrooms don't have speakers. Instead, the prison transmits the audio portion via a weak radio signal that can be received through a portable radio and headset. Each inmate must purchase his own radio from the prison commissary.Nearly all inmates in every prison own a portable personal radio. In fact, these radios are considered status symbols — the better the radio, the wealthier the inmate. The same holds true for tennis shoes. The more expensive the shoes, the higher the prisoner is on the inmate ladder of status. Prisoners have been savagely attacked and even killed over these two items.Each morning, the inmates are awakened by an announcement or the sound of a ringing bell or buzzer. Inmates must make their bunks properly, and no inmate is allowed to remain in his bed for any reason other than illness. Some jails require inmates to remove their mattresses from their individual cells and place them on the floor of the day room during daytime hours. When all mattresses and inmates are out of their cells, the cell doors are locked until evening. This procedure is done to enable officers to see the inmates at all times other than when they're sleeping. It also prevents the inmates from conducting any unauthorized and illegal activities inside their dark cells, such as rape and assault. If an inmate becomes ill, he must have a written order from a doctor to be excused from work and school assignments.Inside a female inmate's dormitory.JOB ASSIGNMENTSAs noted earlier in the chapter, each inmate is assigned a routine task as a job assignment. The assignments vary in nature and range from picking up trash for a few minutes a day to working as a prison cook.Prisons and jails maintain their own maintenance workforce made up of inmate labor. The inmates perform all electrical work, carpentry, plumbing, painting, automobile repairs, landscaping, heating and air conditioning repair and installation, and concrete and masonry work. A staff member skilled in each particular trade area supervises the individual inmate crews.Work crews have even been assigned to build entire facilities in some parts of the country at an enormous saving for the government. Inmates are paid anywhere from $.12 to $1.15 per hour. In certain cases, small monthly bonuses are awarded for exemplary work. An inmate must possess a GED or higher educational level to receive more than the basic wage. Prisoners also must use their salaries to make payments on court fines and fees and other financial responsibilities such as child support. During holiday seasons many inmates donate portions of their wages to charities.A few prisoners use the remainder of their day to take advantage of educational classes, but the majorities choose to engage in recreational activities of some sort. Inmates who don't have written proof that they completed high school are required, at a minimum, to complete a 240-hour GED program prior to release, and they must participate in classes on parenting, substance-abuse prevention (if their offense involved drugs or alcohol), and résumé preparation.Local community colleges are paid by the government to supply instructors for a variety of continuing education programs. The inmates that take advantage of the educational programs often earn associate and bachelor degrees in general studies. Prisoners are responsible for the cost of the college coursework.Computer classes, such as word processing, are offered at many prisons, but inmates aren't allowed Internet access, nor are they allowed to have computer disks in their possession. The disks are checked in and out daily, like library books, from the instructors. If the inmates were allowed control of a disk it would be a simple matter for them to send and receive illegal information to outside sources.INMATE CURRENCYSince prisoners aren't allowed to possess cash money, they've devised their own currency. In the days when smoking was allowed in prisons, cigarettes were used as money. Now, most institutions have banned smoking, so prisoners had to come up with a new currency. Today, all prisoners use U.S. postage stamps as money. Each stamp is worth fifty cents, and an entire book of stamps is equal to a ten-dollar bill.Prisoners need their currency to survive. They operate on an illegal supply and demand system, and they're paid in stamps for the work they do for other inmates. It's against all rules and regulations for inmates to charge other inmates for anything, but they do. Some of the services inmates charge for are cooking, cleaning (cells or dormitory areas), washing and ironing clothes, shining shoes, and stealing food from the kitchen. Inmate clerks working in the prison libraries and chaplain's offices make copies for other prisoners, and inmate barbers cut hair. Some sample prices for illegal inmate services and goods include:Washing clothes: four stamps per loadShoeshine: two stampsClean cell: one book per weekCook meals: four stamps per mealMake copies: two stamps per twenty pages (The prison library charges inmates for copies. The money is deducted from their personal accounts.)Bottle of wine or liquor: five booksA piece of dining hall cake: two stampsTattoo: eight to ten books depending on the sizeMarijuana (one joint): five booksPair of tennis shoes: ten booksKnife or shank: ten booksOral sex: one bookSome inmates run prison “stores.” They buy goods from the prison commissary and resell them, for stamps, to other prisoners who don't have money in their accounts.Inmates are allowed to receive funds from friends and family, and they're paid for working their prison jobs. The money they receive is placed into an account that they're allowed to draw from by using their ID card, which is similar to a bank ATM or debit card. They're allowed to spend their money in the prison commissary. They can also send money home to their families and can use it to pay court fines and restitution. Their prison ID number must accompany all transactions.Prison commissaries, where inmates are usually allowed to shop once a week, offer a large selection of goods. Some of the items available for purchase are:Soft drinksSewing suppliesIce creamLaundry detergentCandyWork shoesCookiesAlarm clocksCakesPencilsPastaCanned meatsTomato saucePlastic forks and spoonsFresh vegetablesPlastic food containersTennis shoesChipsTennis ballsPretzelsRadiosTortillasFruitTeaSocksCoffeeUnderwearPrepaid telephone minutesPostage stampsGreeting cardsStationeryProcessed summer sausageRECREATIONEach prison has a recreation director who oversees the recreational department and arranges programs, sporting events, games, and matches. The recreation supervisor oversees activities such as tennis, golf, basketball, football, soccer, softball, chess, checkers, and backgammon tournaments; picnics; and musical programs. The prisoners play all games on regulation fields and courts with the best of equipment. (It seems odd that so much money is spent on recreation when food and medical care sometimes go lacking.) All players wear uniforms, as do the inmate referees and umpires. Federal prisons used to have swimming pools for the inmate population, but public outcry and civil liability finally forced prison officials to fill them with dirt and concrete.It's common to see inmates prepping their football or soccer fields by marking the goal and yard lines with lime, while other prisoners lounge around listening to portable radios and tanning in the sun. The regulation-size track encompassing the ball fields is a hub of daily activity. Inmates walk lap after lap, not only for exercise, but also as a means of communicating with one another without being overheard by staff members and corrections officers. The recreation yard is the one place where the prisoners have near-freedom, where the prisoners greatly outnumber the guards, and supervision is at a minimum or nearly nonexistent.MEALSBreakfast and lunch are the two busiest times of the day for the prison kitchen staff. These are also two very dangerous times for the prison security staff because these are two times when the largest gathering of inmates is assembled. The evening meals are normally not attended by as many inmates because the meals aren't as good as the other two, so the inmates cook their own food in their dormitories or cells. (In all prisons other than Supermax prisons, where inmates are locked down twenty-four hours a day, the recreation yards are open for all prisoners after the 4:00 P.M. count has cleared. They're normally allowed full access to the entire area — recreation areas, gym, library, music rooms, chapel, arts and crafts, etc.)Prison kitchens serve special meals for each holiday. These meals are based on the cultural aspect of the holiday and are attended by nearly all inmates. For example, on Cinco de Mayo (Spanish for “fifth of May”), the Mexican holiday celebrating Mexico's defeat of French forces in 1862, federal prisons serve a complete, authentic Mexican meal.Some federal prisons offer cooking classes. Those facilities serve some of the best meals in the entire prison system. In fact, these institutions are high on the list when it comes to inmates requesting transfers.There are federal prisons that serve wonderful food. They have complete salad and beverage bars, and the inmates are given a choice of the meat and vegetables they prefer.PILL CALLThree times each day, early morning, noon, and 7:30 P.M., the prison medical department holds pill call. This event is the high point of the day for many inmates. It's the time when they receive their much-needed and often-desired medications. Lines outside the medical department begin to form as early as thirty minutes before the doors open.Inside, nurses insert a single dose of each inmate's medication in a small envelope. When the doors to the medical office are finally opened, the inmates begin to file inside one at a time. They're given their designated envelope along with a small cup of water. They're required to swallow the medication and water while inside the department. A corrections officer is on hand to observe the procedure. After swallowing their medicine, the inmates are required to face the officer, open their mouths, and lift their tongues. Once the officer is satisfied that an inmate has swallowed the pills he's free to return to his designated area.Today, a great number of prisoners are heavily medicated with drugs such as chlorpromazine (Thorazine), sertraline (Zoloft), trazodone (Desyrel), and alprazolam (Xanax). These drugs are prescribed to calm the prisoners; when they're too tranquil, other drugs are given to perk them up. Ironically, for the vast majority of prisoners, the cycle of using mood-and mind-altering drugs is precisely the reason they're incarcerated in the first place. It's an unending circle.Some prisons offer excellent medical care and treatment. In these institutions the prisoners are treated with the same care and compassion as are honest citizens on the outside. In fact, some of the medical care given to prisoners has become a subject of recent controversy. Incarcerated individuals have received heart, liver, and kidney transplants, invoking anger among law-abiding persons who themselves are in need of those life-giving organs but can't afford the procedure or locate a donor. Public opinion seems to favor giving those outside prison walls first priority in receiving the donated organs.VISITORSVisitation from family and friends is encouraged by prison officials. For rehabilitation purposes it's important for inmates to maintain strong family ties. Regular visits are also good for the temperament of inmates. Inmates who don't receive regular visits are often withdrawn, depressed, and ill-tempered.Most prisons allow inmates to receive visitors on weekends (some allow weekday visits). Some prisons use open visiting rooms that are much like a high school cafeteria. In these rooms, inmates and visitors are allowed to sit at a table together. Spouses are allowed a brief hug and kiss at the beginning of their visits and another at the end. If time and space allow, some prisons allow prisoners to visit an entire day. Most prisons have a one-or two-hour time limit. Children of all ages are permitted to visit.In the higher-security facilities inmates may only be allowed to visit for a few minutes. They also may only be allowed to visit while seated in a small booth while their loved one is seated on the opposite side of a small window. They speak to one another via telephone.Inmates are strip-searched before entering visiting rooms and again when they leave. Visitors are also subject to being searched. If they refuse, they aren't allowed to visit. Former inmates who are still on probation or parole may not visit a prison inmate.It's not unusual to see inmates sitting alone and crying once they've returned to their cells after a visit. It's hard for them to say goodbye.THE END OF THE DAYPrisoners complete the workday around 3:00 P.M. and must be inside their cells or dorms before 4:00 P.M. At prisons all across the country, at precisely 4:00 P.M. all inmates are required to stand beside their beds for an official head count. They can't talk or move during this standing count. Policy requires that two officers from each section of the prison conduct a count in their area. At the commencement of count time, one officer yells, “Count,” which is the signal to the inmates that the procedure's begun.The first officer walks through the designated area (a dorm or cell block) and counts each inmate. When he's finished the second officer walks through, counting. The two officers compare totals and if they agree, the number is called in to the main control office. The tally for the entire prison is called in to a state office where the total for the entire state is verified. In the federal system, the number is verified for the entire country. Anyone violating the count rules (a very serious offense) is taken to The Hole immediately after the completion of the count.Any discrepancy in the final total requires a second count. If it's determined that an inmate is absent, the entire prison is locked down, the inmates are confined to their cells or dorms, and a search for the missing inmate commences immediately.After the count is completed, evenings and nights in a prison are times of relaxation for the prisoners. Inmates play sports, cards, watch television, and exercise. Some visit with other inmates recounting the day's activities or reminiscing about life on the outside. Others use the time to call family members from one of the pay phones located with their own dorms (inmates aren't allowed to visit other dorms).The phone system operates in one of two ways. Prisoners can make a collect call, which normally costs the recipient of the call several dollars per minute (many times the price of calls on the outside). The phone systems in prisons are owned by private companies, and they make a huge profit from each collect call made.The other way an inmate can place a phone call is through money in his personal account, an account where family members and friends can make deposits. The prison also deposits the inmate's pay into this account. When the inmate places a direct call, funds are automatically deducted from his account on a minute-by-minute basis. Fees for calls made directly are the same as the fees charged on the outside.Some inmates busy themselves with legitimate activities during the evening hours, such as letter writing, reading, attending church services, choir practice, and playing musical instruments. Evening is also the time when most of the prison's illegal activities occur. It's the time when drugs are sold and used, weapons are made and sold, stabbings occur, homemade wine (“hooch” or “pruno”) is made and/or consumed, inmates have sexual encounters, and, in some cases, inmates escape, especially from prison camps where there are no fences or walls. The night ends at 10:00 P.M. when the final count for the evening is held. Inmates aren't required to stand for this count, but they're required to be in their immediate bed area. When 10:00 P.M. count is complete, the lights are turned out for the night.This day and night cycle of activity is repeated, without change, for the duration of an inmate's incarceration. The only thing that changes is the calendar that most prisoners have hanging on their wall. A favorite saying that's used by prisoners is, “The man can take away everything I've got, but they can't stop my time.”THE LAST DAYS OF CONFINEMENTFriendships and strong bonds are developed in prison, and when an inmate's release date arrives it's not only a time of joy but a moment of sadness. She wants to leave, but at the same time she hates to leave her close friends behind. Fear is also an emotion felt by many inmates as they prepare to walk outside the prison gates for the first time in many years. They're scared of what the outside world has become since they left it so long ago.For many, they've never seen a cell phone or a computer. The last car they remember driving had the headlight dimmer switch in the floorboard that was operated with the driver's left foot. Money doesn't look the same, and there was no such thing as a debit card when many prisoners began to serve their sentences.INTERESTING PRISON FACTSInmates stand in long lines on “chicken day” to receive a rare treat of real meat — bone-in portions of chicken, usually leg quarters.Prisoners receive a dessert with each meal.Some prisons have a salad bar and a choice of beverages with the evening meal.A shank, or shiv, is a knife fashioned from items such as a toothbrush, razor blade, or hard plastic or sharpened metal. The handle is usually wrapped with masking or duct tape stolen from a work crew.Hooch, or pruno, is a crude alcoholic beverage made from fermented fruit (inmates can buy fruit from the prison commissary). Sliced bread is placed into the mixture as a substitute for yeast.Shorty is a nickname used by inmates for all women.Juan and Jody are two universal nicknames used by prisoners for the lovers their wives take on while the husbands are incarcerated.Inmates must knock on a table like knocking on a door before standing as a sign of respect to those convicts left seated.Prisoners aren't allowed to cut in front of anyone standing in line for anything. It's a sign of disrespect and could result in the death of the line-breaker.Prisons offer current movies on weekends for the prisoners.The term “big house” is no longer used when referring to a prison.Foggy weather is the time when many prisoners choose to escape so they can use the fog as a means of concealment.The term “screw” when referring to a guard is no longer used.The term “turnkey” is no longer used when referring to a guard.The majority of sexual contact between inmates occurs in the shower.Inmates toast grilled-cheese sandwiches in their dorms or cells by first placing an uncooked sandwich between two sheets of notebook paper. Then they hold a hot steam iron against the side facing up until the bread begins to brown (the paper traps in moisture and prevents the bread from burning). The sandwich is flipped over and the process is repeated until the cheese begins to melt. Inmates aren't allowed to possess any food products containing yeast; therefore, the bread and cheese to make these sandwiches must be stolen from the prison kitchen.Inmates sometimes actually pop popcorn inside the prison's industrial clothes dryers.Coffee can be heated inside a jail cell using a nail and a short piece of wire. The inmate wraps one end of the wire around the nail and then places the nail into a cup of coffee. The other end of the wire is inserted into an electrical outlet. The electricity flowing to the nail generates heat that warms the coffee.They're afraid of coming back, yet many of them know they will because they don't know how to exist in a different world.COMING BACKRecidivism is at an all-time high — less than half of all released felons succeed on probation or parole. In many instances, felons return to criminal activity soon after they're released from prison. Police officers know this and focus their attention on the former inmates when they return to their old neighborhoods. It's a distressing sequence that never ends.The prison population has become an older population due to long mandatory minimum sentences for even nonviolent crimes. The average male inmate is approximately thirty-seven years old. The incarceration rate in the United States is 482 per 100,000 residents. Louisiana, Mississippi, Oklahoma, and Texas lead the country with near-double incarceration rates while Maine, Minnesota, and North Dakota fall well below the national average. Texas and California house nearly one-third of all incarcerated females in the country.SUPERMAX PRISONSSupermax prisons are the ultimate in prison security. These prisons were built and designed to house the most dangerous inmates in the country. Inside the Supermax, prisoners aren't allowed to have social contact with humans, other than with guards at count times, shower times, and meal times. There are no work assignments for the general population. Inmate mail in these Supermax prisons is heavily censored, and the prisoners' religious activities are restricted. The inmates spend their entire sentence time at a Supermax prison behind solid steel doors.The inmates are locked down twenty-three hours a day, at minimum, and are allowed out of their single cells for showering only two or three times per week at the discretion of the guards. When an inmate is allowed to take a shower, his hands and feet are firmly shackled and he's escorted to the shower area by a minimum of two guards. The guards remain with the prisoner for his twenty-minute shower time, and then they return him to his cell. Shaving is normally allowed once per week. The inmates are allowed outside their cells for one hour of recreation per day. Their recreation time is spent inside a small cage much like a dog pen.Supermax prisons have been under scrutiny since their inception, for many reasons, and their use as a means of punishment has been a hotly debated subject. A prisoner may be sent to one of these prisons as retribution for rule infractions committed at other institutions.A well-known form of inmate punishment (among the inmates and staff members) is “diesel therapy.” Diesel therapy is the transferring of an inmate from one prison facility to another, time after time, day after day, without allowing the inmate to become settled or rested, or to become involved in treatments or activities offered to other inmates. These transfers normally begin in the wee hours of the morning and end sometime late the following evening, at which time the convict must spend the night in a county jail until the travel sequence can begin again. This cycle repeats sometimes for weeks, even months, until the inmate reaches a final destination, usually the dreaded Supermax. It's an expensive form of punishment, but it's used quite often.PRISON CAMPSOn the other end of the spectrum are prison camps. The camps are usually located just outside the more secure facilities, and the inmates housed in these prisons-without-fences are the supporting workforce for the top-security prison. The camp inmates are low-risk individuals who are nearing the end of their sentences; in federal facilities, that means less than ten years.Convicts at federal prison camps perform a wide spectrum of nearly free labor, working for as little as twelve cents an hour. In some institutions, the prisoners work as clerks in the medical units, warden's offices, and recreation departments. They teach classes in the schools and preach in the chapels. The inmates even serve as florists, supplying flower arrangements for prison parties, meetings, and for the desks of the employees.If an inmate's sentence is for less than ten years, and the newly convicted felon is nonviolent, he may be assigned to serve his sentence at one of the federal prison camps located throughout the country. An inmate who's served the majority of his time and has less than ten years remaining on his sentence may also be transferred to a prison camp.Camp operations differ from camp to camp. The personality of the warden and his staff is often reflected in the mood or ambiance of the camp, and the campers, as the long-timers and the staff call them, react accordingly to the atmosphere. Some facilities are operated by the book, and the residents toe that line. Others are quite relaxed, and the inmates are given nearly free rein to do as they please. Tales of such loosely run camps are passed among inmates, as prison officials move them throughout the country. It soon becomes the goal of prisoners to be transferred to one of these so-called Club Feds.
