---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_016.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["death", "cause", "would", "manner", "could", "heart", "mechanism", "victim", "may", "brain", "natural", "attack", "lead", "homicide", "person", "physician", "might", "result", "accidental", "life", "coroner", "suicide", "determination", "event", "one"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit016html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 6 
CAUSE, MECHANISM,  AND MANNER OF DEATH: 
HOW DID THE VICTIM DIE? 
From a forensic sense, the cause and manner of death are of paramount importance. Somewhere death occurs every minute of every day, but only a small portion of these attracts the attention of the medico-legal investigative system. Before we look at the forensic aspects of death, let’s first look at death itself.
THE DEFINITION OF DEATH  
Death is when someone “ceases to be alive,” right? That’s as good a definition as any, but then again … what does “cease to be alive” mean? And when exactly does that happen? How does one determine when life leaves the body? When and how is someone pronounced dead?
The determination of death has never been straightforward, and before the last one hundred years it was nearly impossible. In fact, as we learned in the previous chapter, the exact moment of death is still controversial.
In the seventeenth century, physicians knew that the living breathed and had a pulse, but that was about it. If you had these you were alive, and if not, you were dead. Sounds easy enough. But some people might appear dead when they are actually ill or intoxicated. Alcohol, drugs, heart attacks, serious infections, bleeding, shock, dehydration, and other situations might render the victim comatose, cold to the touch, and with shallow respirations and weak pulses. Signs of life may be difficult to ascertain. Not uncommonly, people who were thought to be dead woke up.
To overcome this problem, several methods for determining the presence of death were devised. Tongue and nipple pulling, tobacco smoke enemas, and the insertion of hot pokers into various body orifices were each used. I’d suspect that, if alive, the hot poker deal would get the person’s attention. Tongue pulling was so popular that a device for performing this was developed. It consisted of a clamp for the tongue and a crank that, when turned, would yank the tongue back and forth. After an hour or so of this, if the person didn’t respond, death was proclaimed.
Still, the occasional seriously ill, but living, person who was pronounced dead proved not to be.
Finally, a system of vitae dubiae asylums, or “waiting mortuaries,” was established. Here the suspected dead would be placed on cots and watched until decay set in. Once the corpse began to smell, death was certain. Though this was unpleasant for the family of the deceased, this system at least allowed for a confident proclamation of death and avoided premature burials, which weren’t unheard of in the seventeenth century.
Two hundred years ago, physicians would listen to a patient’s heart by placing an ear directly against the patient’s chest. This was called direct auscultation. But this was rarely allowed when the patient was female. In 1816, French physician René-Théophile-Hyacinthe Laënnec (1781–1826) found himself in such a situation, so he solved the problem by rolling several sheets of paper into a tube, placing one end to his ear, and the other to the woman’s chest. He found that with this indirect method he could hear the beating heart even more clearly than with the old direct method. The stethoscope was born. It later evolved into its current form.
This invention gave physicians a tool to better hear the lub-dub of the beating heart and allowed for a more accurate determination of death. No heartbeat and no air moving to and fro in the lungs, no life. But still, in people with very shallow breathing and very weak pulses, these sounds might not be heard even when faintly present.
Willem Einthoven (1860–1927) won the 1924 Nobel Prize in Medicine for constructing the first crude electrocardiographic machine (ECG or EKG). This device actually recorded the electrical activity of the heart and gave physicians some objective measure of death. No electrical activity in the heart, no heartbeat, no life. Finally, a true definition of death was available. Or was it?
The twentieth century saw the development of ventilators and pacemakers that could keep the heart and lungs working well after death. This would be artificial life, but if the definition of life was the presence of breathing and a heartbeat, this was life nonetheless. The water suddenly became muddier.
This brought about the concept of brain death, that is, the heart and lungs may be working but the brain is dead. Currently, a death pronouncement in someone with a heartbeat or a pacemaker and on a ventilator requires the absence of brain electrical activity as determined by an electroencephalogram (EEG), a device that measures brain activity.
The concept that the brains of living creatures possessed electrical activity was first proven by Richard Caton (1842–1926) in 1875 when he recorded the electrical waves emitted by the exposed brains of monkeys and rabbits. In 1924, German psychiatrist Hans Berger (1873–1941) recorded the first human EEG by attaching electrodes to the scalp. This gave physicians and scientists the first objective test of brain activity. But even this is controversial since definitions for brain death vary among states today.
As you can see, from the earliest of times to today, the definition of death is not straightforward. But, why is this important to the coroner? Isn’t this a medical and not a forensics question? Not exactly. What if the person in the ICU on a ventilator had been shot in the head or hit by a drunk driver? The charges that could be filed against the shooter or the driver become measurably more serious if the victim dies. The fact that the victim was shot or was hit by the car of a drunk driver makes his death of interest to the coroner and the prosecutors. While alive, the shooter or the driver might face assault or vehicular injury charges, but if the victim dies, the charges could rise to manslaughter or murder. Before the physicians caring for the victim “pull the plug” on the ventilator, they must be absolutely sure the individual has no hope for survival. Otherwise, they could be implicated in the death. And you can bet that prosecutors and defense attorneys would be on opposite sides of any dispute surrounding when to take the victim off life support. The Terri Schiavo case would be an example of such legal jousting.
Another controversy would arise if this same brain-dead individual were to be an organ donor. Before the donation, the donor must be brain dead. But, at the moment that occurs, the corpse falls under the jurisdiction of the ME, and if any organs are then removed without his permission, it could be considered tampering with the death investigation. Fortunately, since time is critical in these situations, the coroner’s office offers an automatic consent in most jurisdictions so that the organs can be removed and donated.
Still, the defense could argue that the death was not due to the gunshot but rather to the removal of the organs or the ventilator. It isn’t the shooter who is guilty but the physicians. And so on and so on. Death is never easy.
Despite these problems with the exact definition of death, once it occurs, it falls in the lap of the ME or coroner. Whenever possible, he must determine the cause, mechanism, and manner of death in any unexpected or suspicious death. To do this, he uses evidence from the crime scene, the autopsy, and the crime lab.
CAUSES AND MECHANISMS OF DEATH  
Simply put, the cause of death is why the individual died. A heart attack, a gunshot wound, a traumatic brain injury—they are the diseases or injuries that caused the physiological derangement that lead to death.
The mechanism of death is the actual physiological derangement that caused the cessation of life. In the heart attack victim, the mechanism could be a lethal change in heart rhythm (cardiac arrhythmia), or the heart could be so severely damaged that it can no longer pump adequate amounts of blood to sustain life (cardiogenic shock). Rarely the mechanism of death in a heart attack victim is a rupture of the heart muscle (ventricular rupture). Each of these mechanisms can lead to death from the same cause—a heart attack.
The gunshot victim could also die by several mechanisms. The bullet could directly damage the heart or the brain. Here, the mechanism would be penetrating trauma to the heart or brain. Or the bullet could cause extensive bleeding, which would lead to death. The mechanism of death would be exsanguination (bleeding to death). Also, the wound could become infected, leading to sepsis (infection throughout the bloodstream and the body) and death. Here, the mechanism would be sepsis, the cause a gunshot wound.
Similarly, the victim of a blow to the head could die from direct trauma to the brain (cerebral contusion), bleeding into the brain itself (intracerebral hemorrhage), or bleeding around the brain (subdural or epidural hematoma), which could lead to compression of the brain and result in the stoppage of breathing (asphyxia). Again, one cause can lead to death by several mechanisms.
Conversely, one mechanism can result from several different causes. Exsanguination (the mechanism of death) can result from such divergent causes as a gunshot, stabbing, bleeding ulcer, bleeding lung tumor, or excessive ingestion of blood-thinning medications such as warfarin. In each case, blood loss and shock are the physiological derangements.
From these examples you can see that a single cause may result in death by varying mechanisms, and a single mechanism can result from several different causes. The coroner must make these determinations and his conclusions can greatly impact any criminal proceedings.
For example, let’s say a man is struck by an intoxicated driver’s car and is severely injured. The paramedics arrive and transport him to the hospital where he dies as a result of his injuries. If the ME determines that the blunt trauma from the car caused severe and lethal brain injuries, the driver may be charged in the man’s death. But, what if the ME determines that the injuries were not that severe and that the victim died from internal bleeding, which the paramedical and hospital personnel failed to recognize and treat appropriately? Who’s responsible for the man’s death? In each of these scenarios, the cause of death is blunt trauma from the automobile impact. But, the mechanism is either a brain contusion or exsanguination. The ME’s assessment of the mechanism will determine what legal actions might follow. One could lead to a charge of vehicular manslaughter and the other to a malpractice suit.
Let’s take this a step further. What if, during his investigation, the ME discovers that the man had been distraught and that he actually threw himself in front of the car? Would the death then be a suicide?
The answer to this question leads to the manner of death, which is how, why, and by whose hand the cause of death came about. The ME must also make this determination.
THE FIVE MANNERS OF DEATH (ACTUALLY FOUR PLUS ONE) 
The manner of death is the root cause of the sequence of events that leads to death. In other words, how and why did these events take place? Who initiated the events and with what intention? Was the death caused by the victim, another person, an unfortunate occurrence, or Mother Nature? There are four main manners of death:
NATURAL: Natural deaths are due to the workings of Mother Nature in that the death results from a natural disease process. Heart attacks, cancers, pneumonias, and strokes are common natural causes of death. This is by far the largest category of death that the ME sees.
ACCIDENTAL: Accidental deaths result from an unplanned and unforeseeable sequence of events. Falls, automobile accidents, and in-home electrocutions are examples of accidental deaths.
SUICIDAL: Suicides are deaths that come by the person’s own hand. Intentional self-inflicted gunshots, drug overdoses, or self-hangings are suicidal deaths.
HOMICIDAL: Homicides are deaths that occur by the hand of another. Note that a homicide is not necessarily a murder. Homicide is a determination of the ME; murder is a legal charge that is determined by the courts. Though each would be ruled a homicide by the ME, the legal jeopardy is much different for a court verdict of negligent homicide as opposed to first- or second-degree murder.
UNDETERMINED OR UNCLASSIFIED: This extra category is used in situations where the coroner can’t accurately determine the appropriate category.
Just as a cause of death can lead to many different mechanisms of death, any cause of death can have several different manners of death. A gunshot wound to the head can’t be a natural death, but it could be deemed homicidal, suicidal, or accidental.
Only natural deaths are due to disease. The other categories involve trauma and could lead to civil or criminal proceedings. Of course, even a natural cause of death may be deemed accidental, homicidal, or, rarely, suicidal. How is this possible? What if a critically ill person is prevented from visiting a doctor or hospital? Maybe an inheritance is at stake. The individual who prevented the victim’s receiving health care could be charged with homicide.
Another scenario could be death from a heart attack because of some error during surgery. Though the cause of death would be a heart attack (a natural event), the manner might be deemed accidental and could lead to malpractice litigation. Or this same person could have severe heart disease and be assaulted on the street. During his struggles with his assailant, he could suffer a heart attack and die. The cause of death would again be a heart attack, but the manner would be homicide, since, but for the attack, he likely would not have suffered a fatal heart attack. At least not at that time and place.
THE CORONER’S DETERMINATION  
It is imperative that the ME attempts to accurately classify the manner of death, as this determination will decide what happens next. When faced with a sudden and unexplained death, the ME will take a series of systematic and logical steps to evaluate the case. This approach is similar to that taken by physicians who treat the ill. The sequence a good physician follows is to take a complete history, perform a physical exam, order the appropriate laboratory tests, and make a diagnosis. Only after this can treatment begin.
When confronted with a homicide, the ME follows a similar approach. He obviously cannot obtain a direct history from the deceased, but he can get information from police reports, medical records, witness statements, and interviews with family, law enforcement, and medical personnel. To help him gather the needed information he may have subpoena power (in some jurisdictions) and usually the blessing of the court. He then performs a “physical exam.” This is the autopsy. He examines the body externally, internally, and microscopically. Based on the findings in his “history and physical exam,” he orders laboratory tests. These may include microscopic examinations of the tissues of various organs, toxicological testing, ballistics evaluations, or any other tests indicated and available in the crime lab. After all this, he makes the “diagnosis”—his statement of the cause and manner of death.
If no overt trauma is seen, the ME first looks for natural causes of death. He reviews medical records, perhaps discusses the situation with the deceased person’s physician, and performs an autopsy if he feels it is necessary. These investigations may lead him to believe that the person died as a result of a heart attack, an infection, the failure of organs such as the liver or kidneys, diabetes, or any number of other diseases. In this case he deems the death to have been natural.
If no natural cause is present, the other manners of death are considered. He then looks for less obvious trauma, poisons or drugs, and other signs of accidental, suicidal, or homicidal death.
What about undetermined or unclassified deaths? How do these come about? Let’s consider the example of a drug abuser who dies from a drug overdose. Heroin and several other illicit drugs when taken in excess amounts can lead to coma, cessation of breathing, and death from asphyxia (see Chapter Eight). Here, the cause of death is a drug overdose and the mechanism is asphyxia. But what is the manner?
What if the victim has a history of overdoses, both accidental and as previous unsuccessful suicide attempts? If he dies from a drug overdose (cause), was it an accident or suicide (manner)? To the ME, the autopsy and laboratory findings would be the same, regardless of the victim’s intent. The ME might order a psychological autopsy in which a forensic psychiatrist delves into the person’s personal history in an attempt to find any hidden motives for suicide. Even after this, the intent or lack of intent of the deceased may not be apparent and the manner of death might be listed as undetermined or unclassified. Simply put, there is no way to know for certain whether the person overdosed accidentally or purposefully.
But it gets even cloudier. What if the victim was a police informant or was due to testify against a local dealer? What if the dealer knew this and sold him a bag of 100 percent heroin, while the usual stuff he gets is only 15 percent? How would he know? Not being a chemist, he would simply melt and shoot up the same amount of the powder and would not know that he was actually taking six times his usual dose. Here the manner of death would be homicide. As we saw above, to the ME and the forensic toxicologist, this death would appear identical to one due to an accident or suicide.
The key point: It’s the intent and by whose hand the event occurred that determines the manner of death.
THE CORONER’S REPORT 
Once the coroner or ME completes his analysis, he files a report in which he lays out the essentials of the case and comes to some conclusion regarding the cause, mechanism, and manner of death. The manner of death is an opinion expressed by the ME after he has looked into all the circumstances leading to and surrounding the death. His opinion may or may not be accepted by the courts, law enforcement, attorneys, or the victim’s family. Even if he concludes that a death was a homicide, prosecutors may not agree and may not file criminal charges. There are many reasons a family might sue to change the manner of death, particularly in situations where the manner of death has been ruled a suicide. Changing the manner of death to accidental may help them accept the loss or perhaps affect any insurance payments.
The ME’s determination of the manner of death has no time limit. For example, a victim who was shot by a perpetrator during a robbery and admitted to a hospital could have a very long hospitalization. During the course of his treatment, he could develop pneumonia and die as a result. The cause of death may be the pneumonia, but the manner of death would be homicide. How can this be? Isn’t pneumonia a natural cause of death? After all, the perpetrator may have shot him, but he didn’t cause the pneumonia that killed him. Well, actually he did, just not directly. The event that began the “cascade of events” that led to death was the gunshot. If not for that, the victim would not be in the hospital and would not have developed the pneumonia that led to his death. The time lag between the inciting event and the actual death, which could be days, months, years, or decades, does not affect the final determination of the manner of death.
The ME’s opinion is not written in stone and may change if more evidence comes to light. Perhaps evidence is presented to suggest that a natural death may not have been so natural. The body is exhumed and high levels of arsenic are found in the remains. With a natural death ruled out, the question then becomes, was this death a suicide, a homicide, or the result of an accidental ingestion? The coroner then shares this information with law enforcement and an investigation begins. Once further information is uncovered, the ME might be able to classify the death into a specific category. If the family uncovered a suicide note, suicide might be favored. If the husband suddenly has a pocketful of insurance money, a new girlfriend, and a bottle of arsenic-containing pesticide hidden in his closet, homicide may be the ruling. But, what if family members come forward with information that the victim possessed the odd belief that a little arsenic taken each day was good for arthritis? Would an accidental death be more likely?
Tackling these types of complex problems is common for the ME. How effective he is depends upon his training, skill, and experience. 
