---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_032.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["light", "sample", "gas", "compound", "chemical", "material", "object", "different", "used", "one", "microscope", "substance", "absorption", "component", "test", "see", "figure", "various", "tested", "gel", "plate", "two", "alcohol", "chromatography", "move"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit032html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
APPENDIX 
FORENSIC SCIENCE TOOLS 
BREATHALYZER: Indiana State Police Captain R.F. Borkenstein invented the breathalyzer in 1954, and though it has undergone many changes since then, the basic concept is the same. This device captures and analyzes expired air. With its valve turned to the TAKE position, the subject blows into a mouthpiece, which leads to a collection chamber where the breath is trapped. The valve is then turned to the ANALYZE position, exposing the captured breath to a mixture of water, silver nitrate in sulfuric acid, and potassium dichromate. Any alcohol in the expired air is immediately oxidized into acetic acid, a reaction that destroys the potassium dichromate in proportion to the amount of alcohol. This means that the more alcohol that is present in the breath, the more of the potassium dichromate that is destroyed.
The breathalyzer also contains a spectrophotometer, a device that measures light absorption. In this case, the spectrophotometer measures the absorption of light at a certain wavelength by potassium dichromate. Obviously as the potassium dichromate is destroyed, its concentration drops, and its absorption of the light decreases. The spectrophotometer measures this change. The degree of change is correlated to the amount of alcohol in the breath, and since the amount of alcohol in an expired breath is a direct reflection of the blood alcohol level, the breathalyzer is an accurate indirect measure of the level of alcohol in the blood.
CHROMATOGRAPHY: Gas chromatography (GC) rapidly separates mixtures of compounds into individual components. The gas chromatograph (see Figure A-1) does this by measuring how fast each component moves through a column of inert gas such as nitrogen or helium. This gas is called the carrier gas since it carries the unknown gaseous sample along as it circulates through a glass or metal column. Basically, the liquid sample is injected into one end of the column where it is heated and vaporized. The gaseous vapor enters the column and flows with the moving carrier gas until it reaches a detector. Various compounds move at different speeds and are thus separated from one another during this transit and arrive at the detector at different times. The time it takes for a chemical to reach the detector is called its retention time (RT), and this varies from chemical to chemical. The detector then sends a signal to a recorder, which prints a graph that represents the RT of each of the compounds detected. The graph is called a chromatograph (see Figure A-2). Often this is all that is needed to determine the composition of the unknown sample, but if further information is needed, GC can be combined with either mass spectroscopy or infrared spectrophotometry, which are discussed below.
Figure A-1: Gas chromatograph. The gas chromatograph consists of an injection port, carrier gas column, detector, and graphic recorder and printer. 
Figure A-2: Chromatographic peaks. The gas chromatographic peak pattern separates different compounds from one another. Each component of an unknown mixture of compounds moves along the column at its own specific speed. The detector recognizes the arrival of each and signals the recorder, which creates a spike for each component. In this chromatograph, each peak represents a different component of the unknown substance tested. 
Pyrolysis gas chromatography (Py/GC) is used whenever the sample to be tested is a solid. The solid must be heated and converted into a gas (this process is called pyrolysis) and then the gas product is subjected to gas chromatography as described above.
Liquid chromatography is similar to GC except that the samples are tested in a liquid form. The sample is dissolved in a liquid solvent and this is then passed through a stationary absorbent material. Each dissolved compound flows along the absorbent material at a different rate and will reach the far end of the material at a different time. This difference serves to separate and often identify the chemical nature of the sample.
Thin layer chromatography (TLC) is also similar to GC in that it can separate and presumptively identify hundreds of compounds at once. The main difference is that it uses a thin layer of absorbent material, usually silica gel, instead of a gas column. In this test, silica gel (or whatever is used for the layer) is spread over a glass plate. The samples to be tested are dissolved in a solvent and then placed in a row on the gel near the bottom of the glass plate along with known standards (mixtures of known composition). After the samples and standards dry, the plate is turned on end and placed into a closed tank, the bottom of which contains a liquid solvent. As the solvent soaks into the gel and begins to rise up the plate by capillary action, it creeps past the samples and standards, collecting each along the way. Each chemical migrates up the plate at different rates. When the solvent reaches the top of the plate, the plate is removed and dried. Each of the chemicals will have a different length of migration, which separates them from one another.
The plate must then be sprayed or dipped in various reagents, which react with various compounds to produce a color reaction. By determining the length of migration vs. the known standards, and by looking at which reagents bring about a particular color change, the presence and type of chemicals in the sample can be determined. The results can then confirmed and refined with mass spectrometry.
GEL ELECTROPHORESIS: Electrophoresis is the process of separating molecules or molecular fragments, such as DNA fragments, according to some physical property, such as size or electrical charge. The basic principle is that the material to be separated is placed at one end of an agarose gel (sort of like Jell-O) and an electrical current is applied. This causes the material to move from one end of the gel toward the other. The various components of the material migrate at different speeds, according to their size, shape, or electrical charge. Smaller, uniformly shaped, and highly charged materials move faster and farther. The opposite is true for larger materials, which encounter more resistance from the gel. This results in bands of separation in which each band contains a different component of the original material. This technique is used in some methods of DNA fingerprinting.
IMMUNOASSAYS: Immunoassays involve an antigen-antibody reaction. The substance searched for is the antigen and the testing reagent is the antibody. An antibody will react only with an antigen that it recognizes and will ignore all others. In this test, an antibody specific for the substance in question is added to the sample. A positive reaction is an agglutination or “clumping” of the antigen-antibody complex. If a reaction occurs, the substance tested for is present. A fluorescent “tag” is often added to the antibody so that the reaction can be “read” by the glow of the fluorescent antigen-antibody complex. If such a radioactive “tag” is used, the process is termed a radioimmunoassay. This is useful in many serological (blood) procedures.
INDUCTIVELY COUPLED PLASMA-MASS SPECTROMETRY (ICP-MS): This test is rapidly becoming the test of choice for very small metal samples. The major drawback is that it is expensive. This test involves using an argon torch to heat the specimen to over 6,000°C, which forms an ionized gas of the substance. This gas is then passed through a mass detector that identifies the chemical by its mass and charge.
MICROSCOPES: Compound binocular microscopes are basically two scopes joined together so that each eye looks through one of the parallel scopes. This is the most common type of microscope used in schools, hospitals, and forensic labs. Light can be cast on the object to be viewed from above, at an angle, or from below, so that the light passes through the specimen. Magnifications can reach 1,200 times or more. Attachments can supply polarized or other types of light, which can aid in the viewing of certain objects. The scope can also be fitted with a micrometer, which serves as a rule for measuring the physical dimensions (length, width, thickness) of very small objects.
Figure A-3: Comparison microscope. This is basically two microscopes joined by a bridge and allows for the side-by-side viewing of two objects. 
Comparison microscopes allow for the side-by-side comparison of two objects. Invented in 1925 by Philip Gravelle, the comparison microscope is basically two microscopes joined by a bridge (see Figure A-3). The bridge contains a series of lenses and mirrors that project images of the two objects into a single binocular lens unit. The viewer sees a circular field divided in half, with the object under the left-hand scope on the left and that under the right on the right (see Figure A-4). Microscopic details of the two specimens can then be compared. It is most often used in tool mark and ballistic comparisons.
Polarized light microscopes allow for the viewing of materials under polarized light, which will bring out details not visible under standard light. In normal light, the light wave oscillations move in all planes, while in polarized light, the wave oscillations all move in one direction or plane. When an object is viewed under polarized light, there is less scatter of the reflected light so the object appears sharper and its colors clearer.
Figure A-4: Comparison microscope field of view. This scope allows for the side-by-side comparison of such things as rifling marks on bullets. 
Stereomicroscopes are binocular scopes (one eyepiece and viewing tube for each eye) in which the two scopes are separated by an angle of 10 to 15 degrees. This gives the viewed object a three-dimensional appearance. Things such as layers of a paint chip, the texture of a fabric, the surface markings of glass, or the curliness of a hair are best seen in stereo.
Scanning electron microscopes (SEMs), which became commercially available in the early 1920s, can attain magnifications up to 100,000 times, though rarely are magnifications above 20 to 25 thousand needed in forensics work. Where a standard microscope uses light to view an object, an SEM uses an electron beam. This beam is swept over the object and viewed through electromagnetic lenses. This not only greatly magnifies the image but also gives it incredible clarity. It is used to examine very small objects, define tiny details, and identify things such as gunshot residue (GSR).
When combined with energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) (see below), the combination (SEM/EDS) becomes an exceptionally powerful identification tool. The SEM locates tiny particles and the EDS reveals their elemental makeup, thus identifying the substance.
NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS: This procedure is cumbersome and requires a nuclear reactor, which is no small expense. In this technique, neutrons are fired at the sample, colliding with its various components. This causes each component to release radiation at its own unique energy level. Measuring the emitted radiation reveals the chemical makeup of the sample. This process is useful in the analysis of paint, soil, hair, metals, and many other substances.
SPECTROSCOPY, SPECTROMETRY, AND SPECTROPHOTOMETRY: Atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) uses the absorption of light by gaseous atoms to identify various chemicals. This means that any solid or liquid materials must first be vaporized before they are submitted to AAS. It is most often used to assess the amount of various metals, such as lead, iron, arsenic, and many others, within the test sample. An example would the determination of arsenic levels in the hair of a victim of chronic arsenic poisoning.
Infrared spectroscopy (IR) depends upon the absorption of infrared light by the sample being tested. Each compound has a different infrared absorption spectrum and can be identified in that manner so that IR basically gives the “chemical fingerprint” of the tested compound. It is often used with GC, a pairing called GC/IR, and this combination is highly accurate for separating and identifying a mixture of compounds.
Energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) analyzes the light and color characteristics of very small objects. When combined with the SEM (see above), a combination called SEM/EDS, it can define structures less than one micron (one millionth of a meter) in size and can accurately define the chemical characteristics of the material.
Mass spectroscopy (MS), like infrared spectroscopy, can give the “chemical fingerprint” of a compound. In this test, rather than the infrared light used in IR, the sample is bombarded with a beam of high-energy electrons, which fragments the compound. These fragments then pass through an electric or magnetic field where they are separated according to their mass. The fragmentation pattern of the unknown sample is then compared to known fragmentation patterns and the composition of the unknown substance is determined. As with IR, it is often used in conjunction with gas chromatography, a combination known as GC/MS. By using GC/MS, virtually any substance can be separated and identified.
Microspectrophotometry is used to measure the light and color characteristics of trace evidence while eliminating the problems of observer bias and variability. Each person sees light and color a little differently. One person’s red might be another’s orange. With microspectrophotometry, the exact color of an object or material, as well as its light transmission, absorption, and reflection characteristics, can be accurately and measurably determined. It works with either standard white light (visible light) or with infrared light and is extremely useful when examining paint chips, colored fibers, and dyed or treated hair.
Ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy takes advantage of the fact that different compounds absorb or reflect UV light in different amounts and at varying wavelengths, which serves to separate tested samples into classes. This means that each compound or class of compounds absorbs UV light more strongly at a specific wavelength and less so at other wavelengths. The magnitude of the absorption at the wavelength of maximum absorption give an indication of the concentration of the chemical in the sample. This is an extremely useful test for the forensic toxicologist.
X-RAY AND ANALYTIC ELECTRON DIFFRACTION: X-ray diffraction (XRD) is a test in which the sample is bombarded with a monochromatic X-ray beam and the scattering of the beam is measured. This reveals how the atoms and molecules in the substance are arranged and gives a “chemical fingerprint” of the substance. This is useful with materials such as paint since it can distinguish among the various polymeric forms of chemical additives such as titanium oxide.
Analytic electron microscopy (AEM) is similar to XRD except that the diffracted beam is a stream of electrons rather than X-rays. It is used to analyze very small samples, even particles as small as a single micrometer in size. 
