---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_025.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["impression", "shoe", "tire", "pattern", "print", "scene", "crime", "tool", "tread", "suspect", "wear", "evidence", "mark", "might", "surface", "shoeprints", "cut", "may", "found", "size", "comparison", "used", "also", "behind", "left"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit025html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 14 
IMPRESSIONS: 
SHOES, TIRES, TOOLS, AND FABRICS  
The criminalist is often confronted with various types of pattern evidence for identification and comparison. We saw in earlier chapters how finger, palm, and foot print patterns, DNA patterns, blood spatter patterns, and even the braid pattern of rope ligatures are useful in criminal investigations. But these are not the only such pattern evidence found at crime scenes and presented to the crime lab.
Shoes, tires, and tools often leave behind patterns and impressions. In most cases, these yield only class evidence, but by examining wear and tear and damage marks, the criminalist might be able to individualize the evidence.
For example, the tread pattern of a shoe might identify the size as well as the manufacturer of the product. This narrows the search for the perpetrator by focusing investigative efforts on the sellers and buyers of the particular shoe. But even if the perpetrator is found, wearing shoes of the same size and brand does not mean that his shoes left the impressions at the crime scene. It simply means that they could have. It does not exclude him or anyone else who wears similar shoes from the suspect list. But, if it can be shown that the wear pattern or areas of specific damage to a suspect shoe exactly match that of the impression found at the crime scene, this would individualize the evidence and point the figure more directly at the owner of the shoes.
SHOE IMPRESSION EVIDENCE  
Shoe manufacturers produce shoes in many styles, shapes, and sizes. Some have plain, leather soles with few distinguishing features while others, particularly athletic shoes, have intricate, easily recognizable tread patterns.
In the course of the day, a person’s shoe tread contacts a wide array of surfaces. Hardwood or tile floors, carpets, soft soil, rain-soaked sidewalks, mud, grass, and snow are all commonly encountered. The soles tend to pick up dirt, oil, grease, moisture, and debris and then deposit these substances on other surfaces, leaving behind shoeprints.
Crime scene shoeprints, like fingerprints, can be patent (visible), latent (invisible), or plastic (three-dimensional).
These deposited prints and impressions can help crime scene investigators in many ways. They can associate a suspect with the crime scene, help with scene reconstruction, link several scenes together, and indicate the minimum number of participants in the crime.
SCENE AND SUSPECT ASSOCIATION 
The most important function of shoe impressions is to associate a particular person with the crime scene. Often this is enough to cast a cloud of suspicion over the individual. For example, if a shoeprint is found at the scene of a murder, robbery, or rape and the print belongs to someone who has no legitimate reason to be there, the simple finding of the print is strong evidence against the person. Why else would his shoeprint be at the scene?
But, even if the person has a plausible reason for his shoeprints to be found in the area of the crime, the prints still may be useful in confirming or rebutting his alibi or story. If the person’s bloody shoeprints were found at a homicide scene, it would suggest that he participated in or was at least present during or after the commission of the crime. He might say he was never at the scene, but his shoeprints in the victim’s blood would say otherwise.
The manufacturer, size, and style of the shoe can be determined from the shoeprint. The FBI keeps a database of thousands of footwear sole patterns that a print can easily be checked against. This determination can be used to include or exclude a suspect as the possible perpetrator. If the suspect owns, or it can be proven that he has owned, an identical size and style of shoe, he cannot be eliminated as a suspect. The finding of the sole pattern of the uncommon and expensive Bruno Magli shoes at the murder scene of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman and the photos of O.J. Simpson wearing the exact same model and size were crucial in the civil judgment against him.
Alternatively, if it can be shown that the suspect neither possessed nor ever had possessed such a shoe, he might be excluded from consideration.
CRIME SCENE RECONSTRUCTION 
Shoe impressions also help with crime scene reconstruction. A suspect whose shoeprints are found at the scene might say he stumbled into the scene, but had nothing to do with the crime. Here, the finding of his prints in areas he says he never entered could be crucial to refuting his story. For example, a neighbor says he walked next door to borrow a cup of sugar and saw the woman who lived there lying on the kitchen floor bludgeoned to death. He says the door was unlocked so he checked her for a pulse, called 911, and waited for the police. He went nowhere else in the house. If the police then discover his shoeprint in the woman’s bedroom near her empty jewelry box, his story immediately becomes suspect.
Prints may also indicate the points of entry and exit. Investigators know these areas are common places to search for shoeprints, and that they often aid in reconstructing the sequence of events surrounding the crime. Plastic shoeprints in the soft soil of a flower garden beneath a pried-open window and matching dirt and grime prints on the floor inside the home indicate the point of entry. Or partial prints matching his shoes found on pieces of glass from a broken window at the point of entry can be damaging evidence. Prints left on tile or wooden floors, stairs, countertops, windowsills, ladders, and chair seats reveal the perpetrator’s movements within the crime scene area. If prints are found in several rooms of a house that has been burglarized, the search concentrates in those areas.
Prints found near an open rear door might indicate the exit route and a search for more evidence along that path would be instigated. Following shoeprints through the crime scene helps investigators focus their search for evidence. Following the exit trail may lead to where the perpetrator tossed a weapon or articles of clothing, such as a mask or gloves. The best evidence tends to be left in the perpetrator’s wake.
SCENE LINKAGE 
A shoeprint can link several crimes. If an identical print is found at several different crime scenes, it indicates that the same perpetrator is involved in each. This linkage can be crucial. Besides the shoeprints, each scene might have other evidence that taken alone is of little help, but when considered together could be significant. For example, let’s say that prints left by a certain brand of men’s athletic shoes, size ten, are found at several murder scenes. At one scene, a blonde hair is also found, at another, gray carpet fibers from a Toyota, at another, red wool clothing fibers, and at yet another blood spatter patterns that suggested the killer was left-handed and approximately six feet tall. Viewed piecemeal, this evidence would tell the investigators little, but with the shoeprints linking the crimes, a clearer picture emerges. The focus is now on a six-foot, left-handed male who drives a Toyota with gray carpets and wears a red wool shirt or jacket. This still does not provide conclusive identification, but it does construct a better profile of the perpetrator and helps investigators focus their search and narrow their suspect list.
MINIMUM NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS 
Multiple shoeprints indicate that more than one person was involved. If investigators find three distinct types of prints, they can state that at a minimum three persons were involved. There could have been more, with some of the perpetrators failing to leave behind shoe impressions, but there can’t be less.
CLASS AND INDIVIDUAL SHOEPRINT EVIDENCE 
Shoe impressions are most often class evidence in that they identify the manufacturer and size of the shoe. But occasionally they are distinctive enough to be individualizing (see Chapter Two: Evidence, “Class vs. Individual Characteristics”).
Each person wears out the soles of his shoes a little differently than everyone else. The wear pattern tends to be more prominent in some areas than in others, since some people walk more on the outside of their feet, others favor the heel, and still others shuffle along on the balls of their feet. How a person’s foot strikes the ground determines how the shoe sole will wear.
The surfaces people frequently walk over vary as well. The wear pattern of an office worker would be greatly different from that of a construction worker or a coal miner. A shoe that walks over smooth surfaces, such as carpets and wooden floors, suffers much less damage than would one that frequently travels over gravel or rough concrete.
Figure 14-1: Minimal shoe tread wear pattern. This tread shows minimal wear and damage to the sole. 
Figure 14-2: Extensive shoe tread wear pattern. This sole shows more extensive wear. 
Pick a well-worn pair of your own shoes and examine the soles and you will see that the original tread pattern is worn in some areas more than in others. Now, examine the soles of someone else’s shoes and you will see that the wear pattern is different. One pair might show minimal wear (see Figure 14-1) while another might reveal more extensive wear (see Figure 14-2).
This means that each of you would leave a different shoeprint. A print made by one of the shoes could be matched to the shoe that made it and exclude the other one. The wear pattern makes the print individual evidence and not simply class specific. Such an individualized pattern often allows the criminalist to positively identify a suspect shoe as the exact shoe that left the impression at the crime scene. Of course, the shoe must be located and tested fairly soon after it left the crime scene impression or further wear and tear can make individual matching impossible.
Other damage and foreign materials can also serve to individualize the print. Cuts, nicks, scratches, and gouges in the sole or a stone trapped in the tread can make the shoeprint distinctive. A print revealing a gouge or a small, embedded rock found at the crime scene positively identifies that a suspect’s shoe possesses the exact same gouge or rock pattern as the one that left the print. As with wear patterns, if weeks or months have gone by before the shoes are located and examined, any gouges or cuts might have lost some of their characteristics and an embedded rock may have come loose. Under these circumstances, the individualizing characteristics are lost or altered and a positive match cannot be made.
GAIT PATTERNS 
Shoeprints might also give insight into the person’s gait, or how he walks. Is his stride long or short? Is his stance wide or narrow? Is he pigeon-toed or slew-footed? Though this is generally unreliable evidence, the stride length and step width may give an indication of height or whether the person has a limp or expose any unusual characteristics of the perpetrator’s gait. Widely spaced, short stride-length impressions are not likely to have been left by a tall, thin suspect.
GATHERING SHOE IMPRESSION EVIDENCE 
Protecting the crime scene involves protecting all the evidence, including shoe impressions. Investigators must be mindful of where perpetrators might have walked and use every means to avoid these areas until the prints can be recovered. Also, exclusionary shoeprints are obtained from all law enforcement personnel who visit the crime scene. This prevents later confusion when prints are examined at the crime lab and allows the examiner to exclude prints that belong to investigators. Often, investigators slip surgical booties over their shoes to avoid such confusion.
I said earlier that shoeprints can be patent, latent, or plastic. The crime scene handling of these prints employs different techniques.
Two-Dimensional Impressions 
Two-dimensional shoeprints can be either patent or latent. Most usable prints are left on firm, smooth surfaces such as wood, tile, or linoleum flooring, glass, plastic, or paper, but occasionally they are also found on carpeting, concrete, and other less even surfaces.
Patent prints are usually made by mud, grease, paint, blood, or some other transferable material. When a person steps into blood or paint, the liquid coats the sole of the shoe so that when he walks on another surface, the liquid is transferred to the new surface in a pattern that reflects the shoe’s sole pattern.
Patent prints are by definition visible and can often simply be photographed. Prints in mud or blood are typically easily seen and captured on film. Others may require an angled light or a high-intensity light source to produce a clear photograph. Regardless, care is taken to obtain the photographs at a 90-degree angle relative to the print. This lessens distortion of the image so that more accurate comparisons can be made. A ruler is always included in the field so that accurate size determination can be carried out.
Latent prints are not readily visible to the naked eye and are deposited by shoes that are relatively clean. Shoe soles constantly pick up and deposit debris, most often in the form of oils, dust, and fine dirt. When the shoe then contacts a clean surface, a faint print is left. Even clean and dry shoes can leave prints on glass, hard-surfaced floors, tables, or countertops that have been polished or waxed, or on surfaces that have a faint film of grease or grime.
Searching for latent shoeprints is as meticulous as a search for latent finger-prints. Near the victim and around points of entry and exit are typically the most fruitful areas to search.
Latent shoeprints are handled in a manner similar to fingerprints (see Chapter Twelve: Fingerprints, “Locating and Collecting Fingerprints”). They may be dusted with fingerprint powder and either photographed or lifted with special adhesive tape. For latent dust or fine dirt prints, an electrostatic lifting device may be used. This device uses high-voltage electricity to create an electrostatic charge that transfers the print to a lifting film specifically designed for this purpose.
Latent blood prints can often be exposed by the use of luminol (see Chapter Nine: Serology).
Let’s say the perpetrator in a robbery-homicide kills the victim in the living room of her home and then walks upstairs and takes jewelry from her bedroom. As he walks on the bloody carpet near his victim, his shoe soles pick up blood. Then when he walks across the room and up the stairs, his bloody shoeprints are transferred to the flooring. These tend to fade from view as more and more of the blood is wiped from his shoe soles with each step. Later during the crime scene evaluation, his trail will be visible and easily followed for several steps, but will eventually disappear. However, if luminol is sprayed over the carpet and the stairway, the previously invisible shoeprints come to life, glowing in the darkened room. The perpetrator’s every movement within the house can be seen.
Three-Dimensional Impressions 
Plastic shoeprints are those made in soft, malleable materials such as mud or snow. Before the impression is manipulated or casted, it is photographed. Angled light helps bring out depth and detail. Impressions in snow and sand create special problems since they are white and contrast is poor. This can be resolved by coating them lightly with a dark spray paint.
Once the impression has been photographed, a cast can usually be made. Though Plaster of Paris was used in the past, dental stone, a hard, durable plaster, is most often used today. Dental stone comes as a powder, which is dissolved in water. First, a metal or wooden frame is placed around the impression. The dental stone mixture is then carefully poured into the shoe impression and allowed to set. This can take from twenty minutes to a couple of hours, depending on ambient temperature and humidity. Near the end of this setting process, the criminalist making the cast scratches his initials into the base so that he can easily and accurately identify it later in court. The casting is then placed in a dry place for approximately twenty-four hours so that it will further harden. This results in a three-dimensional model of the shoe sole, which can be used to match against the shoes of any suspects.
In soft mud and sand, the weight of the plaster or dental stone can deform or change the impression. In this situation, before the casting process is undertaken, it is useful to spray the impression with shellac or an acrylic lacquer, which will harden and support the impression.
Impressions left in snow have other problems: They are easily deformed and snow is prone to melting. Dental stone and plaster are of little use in this circumstance. However, all is not lost. Snow Print Wax, a product that stabilizes snow impressions, can be applied before a cast is made.
A special form of three-dimensional shoe impression occurs when someone steps on a carpet, leaving behind faint indentions in the pile. The indention will fade with time. This is called depression hysteresis. (Hysteresis is a Greek word that means “to lag or be delayed.” The impression remains or lags behind the footstep.) Sometimes an angled light reveals these impressed footprints. Alternatively, interference holography can be used. This technique makes use of a split laser beam to create a holographic image of the print. Though great detail is not revealed, the size and overall structure of the shoe can be determined.
Impression Matching 
Once the crime scene (unknown) shoeprint has been photographed, lifted, or casted, it can be compared to a print obtained from a suspect (known) shoe. The sole of the suspect shoe is coated with ink and its sole pattern is transferred to a sheet of paper or acetate. A visual inspection determines if the shoes possess the same tread pattern and general wear patterns. A magnifying glass, or in some cases a low-power microscope, may be used to reveal small cuts and scars, which are the key to matching any individual characteristics.
Once the criminalist has completed his examination, his report may say one of three things: The impressions match, they do not match, or the results are inconclusive, meaning that neither a match nor the exclusion of the unknown print is possible.
TIRE IMPRESSION EVIDENCE  
Before the invention of the automobile, criminals, and everyone else for that matter, moved about on foot or by horseback. This restricted mobility meant that most crimes were committed close to the perpetrator’s home. After all, how far could he walk or ride a horse in an hour or two? But, with the advent of the automobile, criminals became extremely mobile and could commit crimes in widely spread areas, traveling from state to state, even country to country. This created major problems for law enforcement as they had to greatly broaden their search for evidence. But it also led to new avenues of forensic investigation since a vehicle’s tires can leave behind tire tracks or tire impressions.
Today, cars typically travel over paved roads, and though they can’t leave impressions in firm asphalt or concrete, they might still leave tracks. If the car rolls through mud, paint, or blood, these substances can be picked up by the tire and transferred to the pavement. Tires also pick up grease and grime from the roadway, and if the tire then passes over a piece of paper or a cardboard box along the roadside, clearly visible tracks can be left behind.
Even in the absence of mud or other foreign substances, tires can deposit impressions on paved roads in the form of latent tracks. These come from the extender oils used in tire manufacturing to make the tires more pliable. The amount of any of these oils present in a given tire varies from manufacturer to manufacturer and with the age of the tire. However, these oils can be deposited on the roadway as the tire passes over its surface. They fluoresce under ultraviolet light, exposing the tread pattern, which is then photographed. Since tar also fluoresces under ultraviolet light, this technique is not useful on tar-covered roads.
Occasionally, tires leave behind plastic, three-dimensional impressions when they pass over softer surfaces, such as dirt roads, soft shoulders, mud, snow, and many off-road surfaces such as lawns or fields. Each of these can retain an impression of the vehicle’s tires.
TIRE TRACK CHARACTERISTICS 
Tires are produced in a wide variety of styles and sizes. Each manufacturer makes several different lines, each with its own tread design, and each of these in varying sizes. These tire tread patterns are analogous to tread patterns on shoes.
As with shoeprints, tire tracks tend to be class evidence, but wear patterns can individualize the impression. A particular tread design might point to a particular manufacturer and tire size, but cannot usually indicate the exact tire that made the impression. Matching a crime scene tire impression to a known design stored in a database narrows the search for suspects so that investigators can focus their attention on vehicles with similar tires.
Tires possess several design features that help with classification and identification (see Figure 14-3). The tread is wrapped around the tire’s circumference in alternating ribs (high points or ridges) and grooves (depressions). There are also transverse grooves called slots that run at more or less 90 degrees to the circumferential treads. This cross-hatching effect breaks up the ribs into more or less square islands called lugs. On the surface of the lugs are small grooves called sipes. These features are fairly standard and appear on most tires.
Figure 14-3: Tire tread pattern. An example of a tread pattern, showing the most common design features. 
Two other important elements, tread wear bars and noise treatments, are also useful in identification. Tread wear bars (also called wear indicators) are bars of rubber that are placed in the grooves at scattered points around the tire. They are raised above the floors of the grooves about one-sixteenth of an inch, which is much lower in height than the tread ribs and lugs. Their purpose is to show the degree of tread wear, and when fully exposed they indicate that the tire should be replaced. Obviously, a tire would have to be significantly worn before these bars would appear in a two-dimensional impression, but they might be clearly visible in a three-dimensional one.
The other tread design feature is called noise treatment. If you look at a car tire carefully, you will see that the tread design is not simply a monotonous repetition of ribs, lugs, and grooves. There are minor variations in the sizes of each of these design elements. Typically, the lugs tend to be of three different sizes, though on better tires there may be as many as nine. The purpose of this variation in lug size is to improve traction and reduce noise. At high speeds, tires tend to vibrate. If the tread design is completely uniform, this vibration will increase due to the development of harmonic waves. This creates more tire noise. A slight variation in design pattern prevents this harmonic buildup and decreases tire noise.
The importance of these design elements to the forensic investigator lies in the fact that each of these varies from manufacturer to manufacturer and can aid in determining the maker and the type of tire in question. Several databases of tread designs, including an extensive one maintained by the FBI, are available to facilitate this process.
Besides helping to determine the exact type and style of the tire, track evidence can also reveal information about the car itself. Track width, or stance, can be measured from the center on one tire to the center of the tire opposite it. If the tracks found show that the vehicle was turning, it is at times possible to determine the wheelbase (distance between the center of the front wheel hubs and the center of the rear wheel hubs) and the turning radius. These characteristics vary among vehicle models and may help narrow the field of search. For example, a Cadillac has a wider stance, longer wheelbase, and wider turning radius than a Volkswagen Beetle.
TIRE IMPRESSION MATCHING 
As with shoeprints, tire track evidence tends to be class specific rather than individualizing. However, tires are constantly subjected to wear and to road hazards, which produce defects that make the tire unique and distinguishable from others of the same model and size.
Wear patterns vary greatly from tire to tire and car to car. If all tires were perfectly aligned and balanced, wear would be more uniform, but this is rarely the case. Instead, tires wear more on one side than the other or more down the middle. The wear pattern may not be circumferentially uniform so that flat spots or islands of excess wear occur. Cuts, tears, gouges, and accumulated debris such as rocks and nails add a unique quality to the tread impression.
At times, impressions from two, three, or all four tires can be recovered at the scene. It is important to collect each and to determine their relative locations on the vehicle. A new car, with new tires, will have the same brand at all four positions, but older cars may have one or more replacement tires. Maybe the replacement tires are all of one type, or maybe they vary, which can be extremely important individualizing evidence. For example, if impressions obtained from a crime scene reveal that the vehicle possessed a different brand of tire at each position and a suspect vehicle is identified that has the same four brands in exactly the same positions, that is very strong evidence that particular vehicle left the impression. Couple this with matching wear patterns and defects on each of the tires and the match becomes extremely conclusive.
OBTAINING TIRE IMPRESSIONS 
Tire tracks may be two-dimensional or three-dimensional. Two-dimensional tracks are found on firmer surfaces and extraneous materials such as paper or cardboard. Three-dimensional impressions occur in soft soil, mud, snow, and other malleable surfaces.
Two-Dimensional Impressions 
Two-dimensional impressions are typically photographed. It is important that the photo be taken at a 90-degree angle to prevent distortion and that a ruler is placed near the track for later size determination.
Tread patterns are obtained by “inking” the suspect tire and rolling it down a long piece of white paper to compare crime scene (unknown) impressions with those of the suspect (known) vehicle. It is important to capture the entire tread since the noise reduction patterns and all individualizing defects are the keys to making an individual match. Obtaining only a foot or so of the pattern might miss this critical information.
Three-Dimensional Impressions 
Before any other manipulation is carried out, three-dimensional impressions are photographed, usually employing angled light to add detail and depth. After this, investigators can proceed with casting the impression. The technique is similar to that for plastic shoe impressions and typically employs dental stone, though Plaster of Paris is still used at times. A good cast produces a model of the tire tread that can be directly compared to the tread from any suspect vehicle. These castings are better for comparisons than photographs since they possess more detail and accurately reflect depth and design element contour and expose any unevenness in the tire tread pattern.
TOOL MARK EVIDENCE  
Tool marks are any impressions or marks left by tools, including screwdrivers, crowbars, chisels, shears, cutters, and presses. The principle behind tool mark analysis is that no two tools are identical. First of all, there are variations in the manufacturing process. Even mass-produced products have minor flaws that distinguish them from one another. Secondly, with use, the tip, sides, and cutting edges of the tool develop nicks, scrapes, striations, and other minor defects. These minor, even microscopic, defects allow for individual characteristics to be identified when the tool is used.
Tool marks fall into three classifications: indented, sliding, and cutting.
Indented marks occur when a tool is pressed into a soft material such as putty, caulking, or thick paint. A screwdriver tip wedged into a caulked window seal to pry open the window often leaves behind an indented mark in the soft caulking. Class characteristics such as width and thickness might be revealed from this type of mark and can be used to determine the size of the screwdriver used. But matching the indented mark to a particular screwdriver is difficult if not impossible.
Sliding marks occur when a tool moves across a stationary surface. Chisels, screwdrivers, and crowbars typically produce sliding marks when wedged into a doorjamb or window seal, leaving behind a pattern of lines or striations in the wood and paint. These striations vary from tool to tool and reveal both manufacturing and use defects. At times, these might be sufficiently distinct to yield a conclusive match with a suspect tool.
Cutting marks are left by tools, such as wire or bolt cutters, that slice through materials. They leave behind lines and striations along the cut edge of the severed object. Since many of these cutting tools are ground by hand, the striation pattern is unique to the particular tool used and might allow the examiner to state that the pattern is so sufficiently unique that it could only have been produced by the particular tool in question. The best cut surfaces for comparison are those made in soft metals such as copper and lead, which tend to retain the microscopic detail of the tool’s blade.
Other types of tool marks include indentions produced by hammers and marks left by drill bits. Safecrackers often use these tools and sometimes the marks they leave behind can identify the instrument used in the robbery.
TOOL MARK LOCATION AND COMPARISON 
At the crime scene, the best place to look for prying tool marks is at points of entry, such as windows, doors, cabinets, and safes. Cutting marks are typically found on chains and lock hasps.
All marks are carefully examined and photographed and, if possible, removed to the lab for further processing. A door, window, lock, or chain may be taken in its entirety to the lab. Casts are made of any indented marks that cannot be moved. Several casting materials are available, but the most versatile seems to be rubberized silicon, since it can maintain the minute detail of the impression and not damage the indented object.
One important caveat is that under no circumstances should the suspect tool be placed into contact with the impression. That is, no effort should be made to “fit” the suspect tool into the indented tool mark. This could alter the impression and make it inadmissible in court, if not completely useless.
In the crime lab, the comparison microscope (see the appendix), which places two images side by side and allows for viewing the smallest details, is the most useful tool for making tool mark comparisons. Under the scope, microscopic lines, grooves, and striations in the mark can be readily seen. When a suspect tool is found, the examiner attempts to match it to the cut object obtained from the crime scene. For this comparison he must make a known cut using the suspect implement. This is best done in some soft material such as lead. Lead has the advantage of not only retaining the striations and defects of the blade, but also its softness does not damage or alter the blade. This is critical since the blade is the evidence, and any alteration of it might make it in admissible in court. The crime scene (unknown) cut surface is then compared to the lab-produced (known) cut surface under the comparison microscope (see Figure 14-4).
Figure 14-4: Tool mark striations. Marks obtained at the crime scene (unknown) and those made in the lab by the suspect tool (known) as seen through the comparison microscope. 
Sometimes making a comparison cut through soft lead is not adequate for making an accurate comparison. In this circumstance, the examiner might re-create the crime scene cut as closely as possible by attempting to cut the same material in the same manner. For example, if a bolt cutter was used to cut a lock hasp and the lab possesses both the cut lock and a suspect bolt cutter, the examiner uses the cutter to cut a similar lock hasp. He attempts to use the same angle and pressure as was used by the perpetrator and then examines the crime scene and the lab-produced cuts with the comparison microscope.
It’s not quite that simple because bolt cutters and similar devices produce a special problem for the examiner. The severed bolt or lock hasp is typically smaller than the device’s cutting edge. That is, the blade is much wider than the object that it cuts. But if an accurate comparison is to be made, the lab-produced cuts must be made by the same portion of the cutting blade. The examiner could make several cuts using different areas of the blade, but this would be time-consuming and could damage the blade, making further comparisons impossible.
Fortunately for the examiner, there are chemical tests that reveal traces of the cut object or material on the cutting edge of the tool. For example, many locks possess zinc coatings. Testing the blade for zinc may reveal exactly where on the blade the cut was made. This allows the examiner to make a similar cut at the same place and thus make a more accurate comparison.
The examiner might also be called on to make a comparison of pressed imprints. Many illegal drug labs compress their product into tablets. The presses used for this often leave behind distinguishing marks on the surface of the pill, and microscopic examination of the press and the suspect pills may lead to a match.
FABRIC IMPRESSIONS  
As with fingers, shoes, and tires, fabrics, leathers, and other materials can also leave behind impressions. The most common fabric impressions come from gloves (see Chapter Twelve: Fingerprints, “Glove Prints”). Like fingertips, gloves pick up grease, dirt, and grime and can deposit either patent or latent prints on surfaces. Sometimes the deposited patterns can be used for comparison with a suspect glove.
Leather gloves tend to crease, wrinkle, and crack with use, and the pattern of these defects may allow for individualization of a print to a specific glove. Gloves made from cotton and other fabrics may leave behind an imprint of their weave pattern. Pulls, snags, tears, and other imperfections may make the print individual enough for conclusive matching to a suspect glove.
Glove prints are handled in a manner similar to fingerprints. Patent prints are photographed and latent prints are dusted with fingerprint powder and then photographed and lifted. And as with fingerprints, prints left in dust can be lifted using an electrostatic device. A piece of plastic film is placed over the print and an electrostatic charge is added. This causes the dust to attach to the film, which can then be photographed.
Other fabrics may also leave impressions. Blood, oil, grease, or dirt on clothing can be transferred to a wall or other object by contact. A killer who kneels next to his bleeding victim might later transfer a bloody fabric pattern on a floor, wall, or door. Fabric impressions from the clothing of hit-and-run victims have been found in the dirt and grease on car fenders and bumpers. A perpetrator might sit on an uncovered chair, countertop, or car fender and transfer a unique pocket-stitching pattern to the surface. Leaning on a tabletop might leave behind the weave pattern of a knitted sleeve or tweed jacket. The possibilities are almost endless. 
