---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_030.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["victim", "crime", "killer", "offender", "might", "criminal", "scene", "psychiatrist", "often", "serial", "would", "fantasy", "forensic", "person", "one", "may", "suspect", "time", "many", "perpetrator", "police", "case", "murder", "people", "mental"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit030html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 19 
CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
ASSESSING THE MIND  
The study of the psychology behind criminal activity falls to the forensic psychologist and psychiatrist. Though people often use the terms psychologist and psychiatrist interchangeably, they are quite different. A doctor of psychology possesses a PhD, while a psychiatrist has a medical degree. The psychiatrist must go through four years of medical school, as would any other physician, and then complete a residency in psychiatry.
Clinical psychologists are trained to test and interview patients in order to determine their mental state, competence, and sanity, and to offer counseling. A clinical psychiatrist does all this but in addition is a medical doctor, which allows him to perform psychotherapy and employ medications in his treatment regimens.
FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY  
As we saw in our discussion of pathologists (see Chapter One: Forensic Science), the work of the clinical psychologist or psychiatrist and his forensic counterpart are quite distinct. The former attempts to analyze and treat his patient with the hope of improving his mental health, while the latter tries to dissect the criminal mind to search for motives, competency, and sanity in the criminal arena. Forensic psychiatry is, by definition, the legal aspects of psychiatry.
HISTORICAL MISSTEPS 
Society has always searched for a method to identify the “bad guys.” The rationale is simple: If criminals can be identified and put away, the public will be safe. If not, the public is at risk. This fear is fueled by such seemingly “normal” serial killers like Ted Bundy, John Wayne Gacy, and most recently Dennis Rader, the BTK Killer. These guys weren’t slobbering monsters and wild animals—at least in outward appearance. This is discomforting to most people.
Because of this, there has been a long, historical search for methods to identify the “criminal type.” Let’s look at a couple of the more famous people who have delved into this arena.
German physician Franz Joseph Gall (1758–1828) developed the field of phrenology around 1800. He believed that criminality could be determined by reading the “bumps” on a person’s head. The concept was that the criminal’s brain was abnormal and since the brain resided within the skull, the abnormality would in turn alter the shape and contour of the overlying bone. He believed that feeling for these changes could detect the abnormal brain and identify the criminal personality.
Cesare Lombroso (1835–1909), a professor of psychiatry and director of a mental asylum in Pesaro, Italy, published his book The Criminal Man in 1876. In it he states that criminals can be identified and classified by their physical characteristics. Attributes that indicated criminality included: cleft palates, poor teeth, long arms, an asymmetric head shape, prominent jaw or cheekbones, large ears, a hawk nose, fleshy lips, extra fingers or toes, and other physical “defects.” In his article “Criminal Anthropology,” published in The Forum in 1895, he suggests that not only could these features point out the criminal element, but also that some characteristics indicated the type of crime the person would likely commit. According to Lombroso, assassins had prominent jaws and pale faces and ravishers short hands, narrow foreheads, and light hair, while pickpockets possessed long fingers (this actually makes sense) and black hair.
These theories and many others have long since fallen by the wayside, as of course they should, but the search for the “criminal mind” continues. Profiling, which will be discussed later in this chapter, is one such endeavor. In addition, there are studies underway that utilize such high-tech devices as CT scans, MRIs, and PET scans to evaluate the brain function of criminals. The goal is to develop techniques as wide ranging as a better lie detector to identifying those with brain disorders that could lead to aberrant behavior.
Modern forensic psychiatrists and psychologists take a more reasoned and scientific approach to evaluating suspects and criminals than did their predecessors.
THE ROLE OF THE FORENSIC PSYCHIATRIC PROFESSIONAL 
The forensic psychiatric professional might be called upon to perform several functions, including:
• testing of a suspect for mental illness 
• assessing a perpetrator’s sanity 
• establishing a perpetrator’s mental state at the time the crime occurred 
• determining competency to stand trial, offer testimony, sign contracts, and perform other actions 
• evaluating suspects for signs of deception and malingering 
• profiling perpetrators and victims  
To perform these duties he uses various medical records, examinations and tests, psychiatric tests and interviews, police and witness reports, and crime scene evidence.
The medical (clinical) and legal (forensic) aspects of psychiatry have widely divergent goals and methods.
The clinical psychiatrist’s primary goal is to develop rapport and a trusting relationship with the patient. If successful, the patient will open up and tell the psychiatrist what he needs to know in order to develop the proper treatment plan. The process is cooperative and the psychiatrist does not make moral or value judgments about the patient.
Forensic psychiatry is the opposite. It is adversarial rather than cooperative. It is judgmental in that the legal system is designed to make moral judgments concerning responsibility. The goal is not to treat the individual but rather to dissect his personality so that motives can be revealed. This means that the subject and the forensic psychiatrist are often at odds.
In the clinical arena, the patient has every reason to be truthful. After all, both he and his physician want him to get better. In the forensic setting, the person has many reasons to lie. If guilty, the person wants to hide the truth of his actions and his thoughts. He wants his motivations for the crime in question to remain buried, and to do this he might fabricate or exaggerate symptoms in order to create an insanity defense. He likely views the psychiatrist as an enemy rather than a health care professional.
The forensic psychiatrist is often involved in both criminal and civil matters. In the criminal arena, he might be brought to the case by the prosecution, the defense, or the judge to be involved in homicides, robberies, and kidnappings, or cases of assault, battery, and sexual misconduct. He might be asked to assess the role of alcohol and drugs in the defendant’s conduct, or to determine a person’s sanity or competency to stand trial, or to assess the subject’s understanding of reality and responsibility and offer a judgment as to the suspect’s state of mind at the time of the crime. He might also offer investigators information for use in witness and suspect interrogations.
In civil cases, the psychiatrist is asked to determine competency to sign wills and contracts, manage personal affairs, vote, offer testimony, or stand trial. He might also become involved in spousal and child abuse cases, or disputes involving child custody, sexual harassment, disability, or emotional suffering.
In cases of apparent suicide, the psychiatrist might perform a psychological autopsy to determine if the victim likely took his own life. Interviews with family, friends, and co-workers can often reveal the victim’s behavior during the period before the tragedy and determine whether drugs and alcohol, financial problems, or social difficulties could have contributed to his death.
PSYCHIATRIC TESTING  
Before the forensic psychiatrist can delve into a subject’s psyche, he must first make certain that no illnesses or treatments that could interfere with his evaluation are present. Medical problems such as strokes, certain liver or kidney diseases, and head trauma, as well as many medications, can alter the subject’s ability to think, understand, and reason, and this might impact the examiner’s assessment of the subject. For example, a stroke may have altered the person’s reasoning abilities so that he can’t form complete and coherent thoughts. It may have damaged areas of the brain that control speech, hearing, emotions, and any other brain function. Since these can greatly affect the subject’s performance on the various psychiatric tests, medical problems must be addressed before any psychological testing is undertaken.
Many prescription and illicit drugs alter brain function. Medications for seizure disorders, diabetes, heart disease, insomnia, weight loss, and essentially every known sedative and mood elevator can affect psychiatric testing.
To rule out these medical problems before any psychiatric testing is undertaken, the subject would undergo a complete medical history and physical examination with special attention to his neurological status. A review of his medical, work, and military records would be done. If the subject is a suspect in a crime, police and witness reports, crime scene photos, and autopsy reports (in cases where a death was involved) would be reviewed. Blood testing and perhaps specialized brain testing such as an electroencephalogram (EEG) or an MRI or CT brain scan might also be done. If these examinations are normal, the psychiatrist would then proceed with his evaluation and testing.
The goal of his testing is to search for any significant psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia, and to establish the subject’s thought processes and his cognitive (reasoning) abilities. One important area that the forensic psychiatrist must address is the suspect’s likely state of mind at the time of the crime. Was he capable of understanding what he did and that his acts were harmful or illegal? This is often difficult to determine.
In court, one side or the other almost invariably argues that these tests are fraught with problems in that they assess the suspect’s past and present mental state but do not necessarily determine his state of mind at the time of the crime, so any such determination is merely conjecture. This is in many ways true, but with properly conducted tests and interviews the psychiatrist can most often formulate an accurate assessment.
Psychiatric testing falls into several categories: personality inventories, projective tests, and intellectual and cognitive assessments. Different psychiatric professionals employ different tests, but we will consider some of the more common ones.
PERSONALITY INVENTORIES: These tests, designed to determine the subject’s basic personality type, are highly standardized and reliable. Common ones are the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), the Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI), and the California Psychological Inventory (CPI). Since these are commonly given in schools and the workplace, you’ve likely taken one or more of these at some time during your life.
PROJECTIVE TESTING: These tests evaluate personality and thought processes. They are less standardized and more subjective than the above-mentioned personality inventories. Common ones include the Rorschach test, projective drawing, and the thematic apperception test.
In the Rorschach test, or the ink blot exam, the subject is shown a series of abstract ink blots and is asked to describe what he sees. His descriptions might reveal something about his personality, his thought processes, and his connection to reality, and might also offer a clue to his inner fantasies.
Projective drawing is similar except that the subject produces the drawings, which are then analyzed. He might be asked to draw a house, a car, a tree, a member of the opposite sex, or a frightening scene or situation. His drawings might reveal his inner thought processes and fantasies. For example, if he draws images of a house that is on fire, a woman who has been stabbed, or a leafless tree with broken branches, these constructs might provide a look into his inner world.
In the thematic apperception test (TAT), the person is shown pictures of common situations and asked to make up a story to go with the images. Again, his inner thoughts and fantasies might be revealed. For example, after viewing a photo of a man and a woman talking, he might then relate a tale of how the two are planning their wedding or that they are arguing over money or that they are saying negative things about him. Each of these answers would indicate a different psychiatric state.
INTELLECTUAL AND COGNITIVE TESTS: These are designed to assess the subject’s intelligence, mental competency, thought processes, and ability to understand his behavior. In forensic evaluations, the suspect’s ability to understand situations and his own actions are critical in determining his level of responsibility and competency to stand trial. The most common intelligence test is the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS), which assesses intelligence quotient, or IQ.
After these tests are completed and evaluated, the forensic psychiatrist interviews the subject, during which he probes deeper into any areas of concern uncovered by the testing process. This is where his training and experience comes into play. Because of the complexity and range of these interviews, and because different psychiatrists use different interview techniques, a complete discussion of this subject is far beyond the scope of this text. However, two interview techniques deserve mention: hypnosis and the use of drugs during the interview process.
Hypnosis induces a subject into an altered state of consciousness. This is used to help suspects and witnesses recall certain events and details. One problem is that it is fairly easy to fake hypnosis, so any information obtained by this technique needs corroboration. Also, persons who are under the influence of hypnosis are often highly “suggestable,” so the mere asking of questions may alter their memory for certain events. These new “memories” will become part of their real memory, which renders the validity of any future interviews and court testimony suspect. Some courts allow testimony from previously hypnotized witnesses while others do not.
Though there is no such thing as a “truth serum,” certain drugs such as sodium pentathol can lower inhibitions and defenses. Pentathol is a narcotic that makes the recipient drowsy and euphoric, and might also make him talkative. As with hypnosis, any information gleaned in this fashion is suspect and would likely be challenged in court.
Based on the testing and interview results, the psychiatrist offers an opinion as to the subject’s psychiatric state, competence, and sanity.
COMPETENCE AND SANITY 
The forensic psychiatrist might become involved in all three phases of the criminal justice process: pre-trial, trial, and post-trial. During the pre-trial phase, he could be asked to determine the suspect’s competency to stand trial, offer testimony, understand his rights, work with his attorneys, and confess. Courts do not usually accept confessions from someone who is incompetent or mentally ill.
Competency to stand trial involves the defendant’s ability to understand the charges against him, the possible consequences of the charges, the workings of the courtroom, and the roles of the judge and the attorneys. If he has no understanding of these matters, he can’t be fairly tried. For example, he may harbor delusions that the judge is his grandfather or that the judge and the attorneys are involved in a conspiracy to “get him.” Either delusion would be counter to reality and could affect his ability to participate in his own defense. A competency examination can also determine if the subject is competent enough to confess, testify, waive his Miranda rights (the right to remain silent and to have council present), accept or refuse an insanity defense, or be executed.
Common mental disorders that lead to a determination of lack of competence include:
• mental retardation (resulting from congenital or developmental abnormalities, or from brain injuries or infections) 
• severe drug or alcohol addiction 
• organic brain syndromes (structural or functional brain abnormalities) such as strokes, tumors, or infections 
• severe neuroses that lead to paranoid or severe anxiety states 
• psychoses and schizophrenias where there is an altered perception of reality  
During the trial, the forensic psychiatrist might take the stand in order to offer an opinion regarding the suspect’s mental state at the time of the crime. If the person was mentally ill—temporarily or permanently—at the time he committed the crime, he might present a defense based on insanity.
In the post-trial or sentencing phase, the psychiatrist might be asked to address the defendant’s need for admission to a treatment facility as opposed to a prison, or to offer his opinion regarding the defendant’s level of dangerousness, or the likelihood of him committing future criminal acts. In death penalty cases, he may even be asked to comment on a convicted person’s competency to be executed.
It is important to know that insanity is a legal and not a medical term. A psychiatrist can’t diagnose insanity. Only a judge or jury can make that determination. Psychiatrists can diagnose mental disorders and advise the court as to their findings, but the final say comes from the law, not medicine.
Legal insanity is a slippery, poorly defined term that varies among jurisdictions. However, most jurisdictions use the M’Naughten Rule, which dates to the early nineteenth century in England, as the yardstick for determining sanity. It is primarily a statement of the defendant’s cognitive ability in that it asks whether the perpetrator suffered from any mental disorder that prevented him from understanding the nature and the consequences of his actions. In other words, an individual could be found not guilty by reason of insanity if he did not know at the time of the crime’s commission that his actions were illegal or if he was incapable of altering his illicit behavior.
Congress passed the Insanity Defense Reform Act of 1984, which states that a person can be found not guilty by reason of insanity if “the defendant, as a result of a severe mental disease or defect, was unable to appreciate the nature and quality or the wrongfulness of his acts.” The term appreciate is vastly different from the word know. It implies a higher degree of understanding than simple knowledge.
Both the M’Naughten Rule and the Insanity Defense definitions address the fact that a crime has two parts: One is the criminal activity, termed the actus reus, while the second part is the mens rea, or the criminal intent.
Diminished capacity is a special form of “insanity,” and like true insanity its definition varies among jurisdictions. The basic tenet of diminished capacity is that certain conditions present during the commission of the crime reduced the person’s ability to alter his actions or to distinguish between right and wrong. In other words, the perpetrator was not capable of forming a specific criminal intent or could not act in a purposeful manner. This may relieve the person from criminal guilt or at least reduce the degree of his crime. For example, a person suffering from paranoid delusions secondary to chronic cocaine or methamphetamine abuse might not have been capable of planning a murder. This may change his degree of liability from first- to second-degree murder.
LIES AND DECEPTIONS 
Criminals lie. Always have and always will. If they didn’t, police investigation would be an easy job. The criminal would simply walk in and confess. But, that’s not the case. Whether it’s forgery, establishing a false alibi, staging a crime scene, or lying in court, the criminal will alter, distort, and manufacture the truth to his own ends. In other situations, a witness’s identification of a suspect may be erroneous or an innocent person may offer a false confession. Though their intent is not to lie, the result is still false information.
Distortion, exaggeration, and deception present problems for the forensic psychiatrist. As I stated earlier, the relationship between the forensic psychiatrist and the suspect is mostly adversarial. Regardless of whether the suspect views the psychiatrist as an enemy or as a possible ally in his deceptions, he is extremely likely to lie. After all, if he can convince the psychiatrist that he’s telling the truth, or that he remembers nothing of the crime, or that he’s insane, he will have an ally in the courtroom.
Let’s say the suspect is indeed guilty of a horrid rape and murder. He might say that he likes and respects women, when the exact opposite is the case. He lies about past interpersonal and sexual experiences and alters or completely fabricate his beliefs and inner feelings. Or he might go the other way and exaggerate his own negative actions and feelings in the hope that he will be declared incompetent or insane, and thus avoid responsibility for his actions. Often these exaggerations revolve around symptoms the suspect believes will lead to a well-known, though controversial, diagnosis such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), multiple personality disorder (MPD), or another disorder that could render him incompetent for trial.
Even though psychiatrists are trained and experienced in detecting deception, they still occasionally fall prey to a clever suspect. The case of Hillside Strangler Kenneth Bianchi is one famous example.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: KENNETH BIANCHI 
During the 1970s, a series of brutal rapes and murders occurred in Los Angeles. The bodies of the victims were dumped in plain sight on hillsides throughout Los Angeles County, which earned the killers the title of the Hillside Stranglers. Through a long and complex investigation, the police finally arrested Angelo Buono in Los Angeles and his cousin Kenneth Bianchi in Bellingham, Washington.
Using knowledge he got from college psychology classes and from the movies The Three Faces of Eve and Sybil, Bianchi concocted an insanity defense that revolved around his alleged MPD. Bianchi said that his evil alter ego, Steve, made him kill the young women and that he, Kenneth, was innocent and a pawn of the evil Steve. He was so good that he fooled several psychiatric professionals.
Finally, Dr. Martin Orne, an expert in hypnosis, evaluated Bianchi and managed to bring out Steve. Though initially convincing, Bianchi made several mistakes. While he was Steve he referred to Steve as “he” rather than “I” on several occasions. If he were truly Steve at that time, he would not use the third-person pronoun “he.” Also, at one point, he was introduced to an imaginary someone whom Kenneth knew but Steve didn’t. He acted out a handshake with the nonexistent person. “Seeing” this imaginary person, much less shaking hands with him, would mean that he was hallucinating (seeing something or someone that was not really there), and this is not part of MPD. Finally, Dr. Orne told Bianchi that it was very unusual for an MPD victim to have only one other personality and that most had several. Almost immediately, “Billy” was born, giving Bianchi three separate personalities.
After his ruse was exposed, Bianchi confessed and agreed to testify against his cousin Angelo in exchange for favorable treatment by the court.
Malingering is a special form of deception. In this case, the subject attempts to make any physical or mental defects appear worse than they are or manufactures them completely. Alternatively, he might try to make a defect less severe than it actually is. Fortunately, the MMPI and several other tests include scales that indicate such deceptions.
EYEWITNESS ACCOUNTS 
It would seem that an eyewitness to a crime would be solid evidence. After all, the witness actually saw the perpetrator and the criminal act. No guesswork or supposition is involved. Case closed, right? Not exactly.
Eyewitnesses are notoriously unreliable. Numerous studies have attested to this fact. For example, in 1974 Robert Buckhout published an article in Scientific American titled “Eyewitness Testimony.” It related the results of an experiment in which fifty-two people witnessed a purse snatching. Only seven of the witnesses were able to identify the thief. This is typical of the many other studies done in this area.
Doesn’t make sense, does it? Seems counterintuitive.
Unfortunately, memory isn’t that simple or that reliable. Creating, storing, and recalling memories is a complex sequence of neurological events. It’s not just simply storing an image or a sound or some other sensory input. It requires a delicate and exact communication among several areas of the brain.
A person’s ability to recall the details of any event fades with time, and the natural tendency is to fill in any blanks with what the person believes should have happened. And this unconscious effort is colored by one’s beliefs, prejudices, motives, and expectations. Add to this the stress of witnessing a frightening or threatening event and the conditions are ripe for false or altered memories. This isn’t necessarily a malicious attempt at deception, but rather just the way the human brain works.
Earwitness testimony is even more problematic. People are occasionally asked to identify a perpetrator by his voice, but unless the voice is exceptionally distinctive, this is an unreliable exercise.
FALSE CONFESSIONS 
False confessions are more common than you might think. It is difficult for most people to grasp why this is so, but there are several reasons.
A false confession may serve to deflect the police from another crime. For example, the suspect may confess to stealing a car or robbing a store, but say that he knows nothing of the murder that occurred at the same time in another location. If he is guilty of the robbery, he could not possibly be the killer. Or perhaps a friend or family member might confess to a crime in order to protect the real culprit.
But what of the people who simply confess for no apparent reason? Many psychological factors come into play. Low self-esteem, fear of the police, a need for fame, or a need to please the authorities or another person may all play a role. Many people have deeply hidden feelings of guilt, real or imagined, and might feel a need to confess to something so that they will be punished for this buried guilt. The use of alcohol or drugs can cloud judgment and lead to confusion, false memories, and fabrications, which in turn can lead to a false confession.
Certain police interrogation tactics might also lead to false confessions. Isolation and fatigue can break down resolve, so that a confession is deemed easier than continuing with the interrogation. If the good cop/bad cop routine is employed by the interrogators, the suspect might confess to the good cop, thinking that he will protect him from the other and from the legal system.
SERIAL AND MULTIPLE OFFENDERS  
Serial offenders have always created special problems for law enforcement. Whether they are serial rapists, bombers, or killers, the episodic nature of their crimes and the fact that they often have no apparent connection to their victims have forced law enforcement officials to develop new techniques for dealing with these types of offenders.
Most murders have readily visible motives such as financial gain, revenge, or to cover another crime. Financial gains from insurance policies, wills, contracts, and marriage or partnership assets lay the foundation for many homicides. Anger and revenge for some wrong, real or imagined, motivates some murderers. Murder to cover crimes such as embezzlement or extortion, or to hide extramarital affairs, is not rare. Occasionally, spouses and children are murdered so that the killer can be free of social responsibilities.
For these reasons, the earliest stages of any homicide investigation focus on people who know and could possibly profit from the victim’s death. This is a rational approach since the overwhelming majority of homicides occur between people who know one another. But this is not the case with most serial killers and rapists. Their motives are more private and personal and may not be readily apparent. More often than not, even when the motive is discovered, it seems totally irrational. But not to the killer.
CLASSIFICATION OF THE MULTIPLE MURDERER 
Multiple murderers are those who have killed more than one person. They are classified according to the location and sequence of the killings into mass, spree, and serial types.
MASS MURDERERS: Those who kill more than four people in one place at one time would fit this classification. These killers often have a clear agenda and want to send a message. This is the killer who walks into his workplace and shoots several people in a rapid-fire assault. The attack often ends with the killer taking his own life or in a “blaze of glory” with the police killing him in an exchange of gunfire. The motive is often some perceived wrong by his co-workers or employer. Examples are the University of Texas Tower shooter Charles Whitman, Columbine killers Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, and Virginia Tech University killer Seung-Hui Cho.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: CHARLES WHITMAN 
On August 1, 1966, a bright, sunny day in Austin, Texas, Charles Whitman snapped and became one of America’s most notorious mass murderers. After killing his wife and mother, the ex-Marine climbed the twenty-seven-story tower on the campus of the University of Texas, armed with an array of rifles and handguns. He laid down a lethal barrage of gunfire on everyone in sight, striking people as far away as five hundred yards. He even hit a plane that carried a police sniper. Before he was himself gunned down by police officers Ramiro Martinez and Houston McCoy, Whitman managed to kill sixteen and wound thirty-one people. His motives were never truly known, but he did leave a letter that suggested he wanted to die dramatically and did not want his wife or mother to suffer the humiliation that would certainly follow his actions.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE COLUMBINE MASSACRE 
At 11:19 A.M. on April 20, 1999, eighteen-year-old Eric Harris and seventeen-year-old Dylan Klebold, wearing trench coats, military fatigues, and ski masks, entered Columbine High School near Littleton, Colorado, armed with rifles, automatic weapons, shotguns, and homemade pipe bombs. Their explosive rampage began in the cafeteria, where fellow students were taking their lunch break, and ended in the library, where the two killers took their own lives. In between, the two killed one teacher and twelve students and wounded two-dozen others. Diaries and a videotape made by the boys the morning of the massacre revealed a deep-seated hatred of many of their classmates.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: VIRGINIA TECH UNIVERSITY MASSACRE 
On April 16, 2007, Seung-Hui Cho, a student at Virginia Tech University in Blacks-burg, went on a killing spree. By the time he finished, he had become the deadliest mass murderer in modern U.S. history. At approximately 7:15 A.M., Cho entered a dorm and fatally shot two people. But Cho was just getting started. He fled the scene, changed clothes, grabbed more weapons and ammunition, and went to the post office, where he mailed a package of papers and a video to NBC News. He then launched a second attack that lasted nine minutes. He fired 174 rounds, killing another thirty people and wounding many others. He then turned his weapon on himself. The materials received by NBC were found to be Cho’s written and videoed manifesto in which he railed against “rich kids” whom he believed participated in “debauchery” and were “deceitful charlatans.” This type of long-standing, deep-seated anger at a group of people is typical of mass murders.
SPREE KILLERS: These individuals kill several people at two or more locations with the killings linked by motive and with no “cooling-off” period between. The spree killer goes on a rampage, moving from place to place, city to city, even state to state, leaving bodies in his wake. It is as if an underlying rage pushes the perpetrator to act, and once he begins, he doesn’t stop or deviate from his goal. As with mass murders, the spree often ends in suicide or a confrontation with law enforcement. Andrew Cunanan offers an example of a spree killer.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: ANDREW CUNANAN 
Andrew Cunanan was often described as a “high-class male prostitute” who catered to wealthy older men. He lived and played in a world of wealth and hedonism until late 1996 when his world began to unravel. In mid-April 1997, he threw himself going away party in San Diego, telling most people that he was moving to San Francisco. However, he apparently told others that he was going to Minnesota to “settle some business.” He then bought a one-way, first-class ticket to Minneapolis. On the night of April 27, 1997, he used a hammer to beat twenty-eight-year-old Jeffrey Trail to death in the Minneapolis apartment of Cunanan’s lover, David Madson. The spree had begun. Five days later, at a lake some fifty miles away, he shot Mad-son in the head and fled in the red Jeep that the two had taken from Trail’s home.
Cunanan drove to Chicago where he took up with seventy-two-year-old real estate mogul Lee Miglin. After torturing and killing Miglin with pruning shears and a garden saw, Cunanan headed east in Miglin’s Lexus. On May 9, he shot and killed William Reese in Pennsville, New Jersey, stole the dead man’s red Chevrolet pickup, and headed south. Cunanan was now on the FBI’s Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list.
He ended up in Miami, Florida, where on the morning of July 15, he shot Gianni Versace twice in the head in front of Versace’s residence, Casa Casuarina. On July 25, police were summoned to the boathouse where Cunanan was hiding by its caretaker, Fernando Carreira. As with many spree killers, Cunanan took his own life before police could apprehend him.
SERIAL KILLERS: These offenders kill several people at different times and locations with a cooling-off period between the killings. The cooling-off period, which may be days, weeks, months, even years in duration, distinguishes serial from spree killers. The catalog of serial killers includes some very famous names: Ted Bundy, John Wayne Gacy, Henry Lee Lucas, Gary Ridgway, Jeffrey Dahmer, Randy Kraft, Dennis Rader, and many others.
THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF SERIAL OFFENDERS 
This is obviously a huge and controversial subject. There are many theories as to where these offenders come from and what triggers their aberrant behavior, and I’m not going to attempt to enter that fray. I will, however, give you some of the more accepted theories regarding what drives these criminals.
Society has always had difficulty understanding and dealing with serial offenders. Whether serial rapists or serial killers, these individuals seem so far removed from the rest of society that a rational method for dealing with them has been and is still out of reach. They are typically psychopaths or sociopaths, two terms that are often used interchangeably. These individuals tend to be self-centered (egocentric and narcissistic), manipulative, emotionally shallow, and devoid of empathy and remorse. They can often lie with impunity, fool even the cleverest interrogator, and occasionally pass a polygraph examination.
Serial rapists and serial killers have a great deal in common. In fact, they may be exactly the same, just at different stages in their psychopathological derangement. Many serial killers begin their adventures with rape and then progress to murder to cover the crime or to increase their enjoyment.
Current thinking is that these individuals cannot be reliably rehabilitated. This is obviously controversial, but one fact remains: There are many laws that are designed to protect the public from these criminals. These types of offenders are given long sentences, and while serial killers are rarely released from prison or a mental facility, sexual predators often do get out eventually. When they are released, they are watched constantly. Neighborhoods that sexual predators move into are notified of their presence.
These are not new concepts. As early as the 1930s, laws mandated that sexual offenders be evaluated and treated by medical professionals, and by the 1960s such programs were in place in virtually every state. It soon became clear to those charged with diagnosing and treating these sexual predators that these offenders were different. They didn’t fit into the usual diagnostic categories and did not respond to the usual treatment regimens. By the 1990s, many states closed these specialized treatment centers and longer prison sentences became the norm.
What makes these types of offenders resistant to treatment?
It appears that the psychosexual pathology that drives these offenders becomes ingrained early in life, and it only grows in strength as the individual matures through puberty and into adult life. Many, but not all, come from backgrounds of physical, psychological, and sexual abuse. They often insulate themselves from this abuse by creating a protective world rich in fantasy. In some, as these fantasies develop, they take on sexual and violent characteristics. These can brew for years, even decades, before the offender begins to act them out.
There is little doubt that fantasy plays a powerful role in the serial offender’s violent crimes. Early on, his fantasies might be amorphous and benign, but as he mentally plays it out over and over, year after year, it becomes more refined. Often the fantasy is simple, but in the more imaginative offenders, it becomes an elaborate scripted play. In many, sexual and violent themes tend to commingle until the two are inseparable.
When the offender goes on the hunt for victims, he is in fact seeking a character in his fantasy play. He looks for a certain type of person or one with a specific look. Ted Bundy sought women with dark hair, parted in the middle. This was the character he needed for his fantasy.
This brings up an important fact about these fantasies—they tend to be very specific. Each of us has different fantasies, and one person’s fantasy would not necessarily appeal to another. But when you fantasize, the details and the feel remain the same, evoking the same emotions with each fantasy. So it is with the serial offender. The difference is that these individuals tend to have sexually violent fantasies, which they may ultimately act out.
But it is these specific details of the fantasy that make it possible to develop a profile of the killer. Since the fantasy is specific and repetitive, certain elements of the criminal act will be specific and repetitive. This is manifested in the killer’s signature.
SERIAL OFFENDER PROFILING 
Profiling is more an art than a science. It is basically looking at the evidence and making a best guess as to the type of individual that would commit the crime in question. The profiler looks at the crime scene, autopsy data, victim, and likely pre- and post-crime behavior of the killer to make this assessment. How did the killer gain access to the victim? What did he do to the victim? Did he try to cover his tracks, and if so, how? What is it about this victim that attracted the killer? What motive or fantasy drove the killer to harm this person in this manner at this time in this location?
In serial murder cases the offender is often termed the unknown subject, or unsub for short. An analysis of the crime scene may offer clues to the type of unsub the police are to search for. Such an analysis has become known as offender profiling. Though profiling may not lead to the exact individual, it often helps the police narrow the focus of their investigation. Profiling might suggest the unsub’s physical and psychological makeup, the area where he lives or works, what behaviors he may have exhibited before the crime and what he is likely to do after the crime, and where other evidence is likely to be located. Lastly, the crime scene may reveal aspects of the unsub’s modus operandi (MO) and his signature.
Besides the usual investigative techniques, law enforcement officials have increasingly turned to criminal profiling to help track serial offenders. Since these are often “stranger” killings, the usual connections between the killer and the victim are not present. But there is always a connection of some type. Something in the killer’s psyche drives him to attack a particular victim at a particular place and at a particular time.
Criminal profiling evolved from studies done by the FBI’s Behavioral Science Unit (BSU), now known as the Investigative Support Unit (ISU). The studies, which included a series of jailhouse interviews with convicted serial killers, were designed to gain insight into violent criminals. Certain commonalities among these types of offenders appeared, which gave investigators a better understanding of these violent offenders, and a useful investigative tool evolved. Crime scene analysis for clues to the offender’s personality and motives and offender profiling have continued to gain popularity and are now considered critically important in tracking serial offenders. The premise is that the perpetrator not only leaves behind physical evidence but also behavioral and psychiatric evidence. Understanding this evidence is the key to finding the perpetrator.
This understanding added the critical “who” to the “how” and “why” that crime investigators have traditionally used. When confronted with a serial or stranger murder victim, the profiler uses the “how” and “why” to make a judgment of “who.” That is, “what type of person” would commit this particular crime in this particular manner?
One of the basic tenets of profiling is that behavior reflects personality. How a person acts derives directly from his personality and psychological needs and fears. Profiling seeks clues to the perpetrator’s personality from his behavior, not only at the crime scene but also before and after the criminal act. These clues provide insight into the killer’s motives, his level of intelligence and sophistication, and his reasons for selecting this particular victim.
Often the killer “poses” the victim. This posturing could be to shock whoever finds the body, or it could be a recreation of his fantasy mental image. The pose could be degrading, angelic, or anything in between; it often reveals how the perpetrator feels about the victim. If he harbors a hatred for the victim, or the person the victim is representing (his mother, prostitutes, or all women), the posing will reflect this.
The first major success of criminal profiling, in a mid-twentieth-century case known as the Mad Bomber, came long before the art of profiling came into existence.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE MAD BOMBER 
On November 16, 1940, an unexploded bomb was found on a window ledge at the Manhattan office of Consolidated Edison, the power company known as Con Ed or Con Edison. Attached was a hand-printed note that said, “Con Edison Crooks— This is for you.” In September 1941, a second unexploded bomb was found. Three months later, after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the bomber sent a letter to police in which he stated that, out of his sense of patriotism, he would send no more bombs until the war was over. Though he sent many letters over the years, he remained true to his word, and no further bombs turned up until well after World War II.
Then on April 24, 1950, another unexploded bomb was found in a phone booth at the New York Public Library. Between 1951 and 1955 over a dozen bombs were set, many of which exploded, and letters from the bomber that expressed a deep anger at Con Ed kept arriving. On December 2, 1956, a very powerful bomb exploded in Brooklyn’s Paramount Theater, injuring several people. This prompted police to bring in psychiatrist Dr. James Brussel, who was known for his uncanny ability to analyze crimes and to speculate as to what type of individual could be the culprit.
After reviewing the Mad Bomber’s letters and the police reports, Dr. Brussel concluded that the person responsible was a middle-aged male who was paranoid, introverted, and held a deep-seated grudge against Con Edison. He told police that the man likely had issues with and may have been fired from the company. He was well educated, probably of Slavic decent, lived with an older female relative, and was extremely neat and meticulous in his work. He would be good with tools and, when captured, would be neatly dressed, likely in a double-breasted suit, buttoned.
Indeed, in one letter the bomber had given the date of September 5, 1931, for an incident that had particularly enraged him. Checking Con Ed’s records, police found that a boiler explosion had occurred at Con Ed on that date and that George Metesky had been injured. Metesky had subsequently written a letter of complaint to the company, and when this was checked against letters from the Mad Bomber, many similar phrases appeared. When police arrested Metseky at his home, they found he was fifty-four, of Polish extraction, unmarried, and living with two older sisters. He was also wearing a double-breasted suit, buttoned.
If actions speak to personality, then looking at the characteristics of the crime scene should offer clues to the perpetrator’s mental state. One basic method of categorizing offenders from crime scene evidence divides them into organized, disorganized, or mixed offenders.
Organized offenders are more sophisticated in their approach and show evidence of planning. They tend to be of average or better intelligence, employed, and have social relationships, such as spouses and families. Even though they are driven by their fantasies, they maintain enough control to avoid being impulsive. They prepare and even rehearse. They tend to target specific victims or types of victims and use control measures, such as restraints, to maintain victim compliance. They bring the tools they need to gain access to and control of the victim and avoid leaving behind evidence. They generally hide or dispose of the body and most likely will have a “dump site” already selected.
Disorganized offenders are the opposite. They usually live alone or with a relative, possess lower than average intelligence, are unemployed or work at menial jobs, and often have mental illnesses. They act impulsively, as if they have little control over their fantasy-driven needs. They rarely use ruses to gain the victim’s confidence, but rather attack with sudden violence and overwhelm the victim. The crime scene is often messy and chaotic. They do not plan ahead or bring tools with them, but instead use whatever is handy. The body is typically left at the scene and little attempt is made to avoid leaving behind evidence. Sexual contact with the victim may occur after death.
Mixed offenders possess characteristics of both the above types and leave behind a mixed scene. They often show evidence of planning and a sophisticated MO, but the assault itself may be frenzied or messy. This might indicate some control over deep-seated and violent fantasies.
To help streamline and standardize the process, profilers have developed categories of descriptors. These “describe” the type of individual that would perpetrate the crime. Some of the descriptors used in serial killer profiling are:
AGE: Most serial killers are in their twenties or thirties. Organized offenders tend to be older and more mature than disorganized ones.
SEX: Almost all are male. Sexually sadistic serial killers are driven by fantasies, which in turn are driven by testosterone, the male sex hormone. A mixture of sexual and violent impulses is at the heart of these types of killings.
RACE: Most don’t cross racial lines. White offenders kill whites; black offenders kill other blacks. Though not universal, this trend speaks to the specificity of the perpetrator’s fantasies. He will seek out victims of a certain age, sex, and ethnicity as dictated by his personal and specific fantasies.
RESIDENCY: Organized offenders may be married, have a family, and be well liked by their friends. Disorganized offenders, because of their mental instability and immaturity, tend to live alone or with a family member.
Proximity of the perpetrator’s home to the crime scene is also important. Disorganized offenders tend to kill close to home because the immediate area is a comfort zone for them. Since they are mentally unstable, movement out of this zone is stressful. On the other hand, organized offenders are usually more mobile and have a broader range. Though their first few victims may be close to home, with experience, their comfort zone expands and so do their predatory boundaries.
SOCIAL SKILLS: Those who use a ruse to ensnare their victims, as Ted Bundy did, typically possess good social skills (organized), whereas those who use a blitz-style attack are less comfortable with conversation (disorganized).
WORK AND MILITARY HISTORY: Organized offenders more often have a stable work history and are more likely to have left any military service with an honorable discharge. Disorganized offenders are often simply too “crazy” to hold a job long term or complete military service.
EDUCATIONAL LEVEL: Organized offenders tend to have more schooling than their disorganized counterparts. Again, the discipline and pressure of school is not handled well by a disorganized person.
Using these descriptors, the profiler can create a “picture” of the type of person that likely committed the crime. This in turn can help the police hone in on a specific suspect. Profiling also plays an important role in the interrogation of suspects. Knowing the type of individual that would commit the criminal act in question can help the investigators design questions and leverage any pressure points, which might snare the suspect in a web of lies or even produce a confession.
Profiling also helps determine whether or not a crime scene is “staged.” Staging means changing the appearance of the scene so that it will look as if the murder took place in a different manner and for a different reason (see Chapter Two: Evidence, “The Stage Crime Scene”). A classic example would be the husband who kills his wife in a fit of anger and then empties drawers and closets, knocks over furniture, and breaks a door lock or window to make it appear as though a burglar committed the crime. When the investigators discover that the wife was severely bludgeoned and stabbed twenty times, the light of suspicion falls on the husband. A burglar would not engage in such overkill. He would kill and run. Overkill is usually personal and anger is a common underlying drive.
Trophies and Souvenirs 
Many criminals take things from the crime scene. Objects of value, such as money, jewels, electronic equipment, and things that can be sold, are commonly stolen. Offenders also remove incriminating evidence, such as the murder weapon or a used condom. Serial offenders tend to take objects that have no monetary or evidentiary value, but rather hold some personal meaning to them as trophies or souvenirs. These may be clothing, jewelry, hair, photos, and even body parts from the victim.
The terms trophy and souvenir have been used interchangeably, but differences between the two exist. The distinction lies in how the offender feels about the victim. If he views the victim as a conquest, he views the taken object as a trophy of his triumph. When he later handles it, it will remind him of his domination of the victim. If he sees the victim as a cherished member of his fantasy, the object is a souvenir, and he will use it to relive the experience and make it part of his masturbatory fantasies.
MO vs. Signature 
Simply put, modus operandi (MO) is the method used to commit the crime. Did the perpetrator drive or walk to the scene? Did he bring weapons and tools with him or simply use what was available? Did he break a window, jimmy a door, or use a ruse to gain entry or overpower the victim? Did he take things of value from the scene? Did he restrain or harm the victim? All of these speak to his method of doing things. Each of these is necessary to conduct the crime and get away with it.
Modus operandi is not a new concept. It dates back to Major L.W. Atcherley, a police constable in England, who developed a ten-point system for dealing with a perpetrator’s MO. He looked at such things as the location of the crime, the point and method of entry, any tools used to gain entry or commit the crime, types of objects taken from the crime scene, time of day, alibi, accomplices, methods of transportation to and from the scene, and any unusual features of the crime. Scotland Yard later adopted many of his techniques.
It is important to point out that MO can evolve over time. As the unsub learns better ways to commit his crimes, he might change his mode of entry, his ruse, his disguise, the time of his attacks, the weapon used, and any other aspect of his MO. Whatever will make his efforts more effective and help him avoid detection might be modified.
A signature is an act that has nothing to do with completing the crime or with getting away with it. These are acts that are important to the offender in some very personal way. Torturing or overkill of the victim, post-mortem mutilation or posing, and the taking of souvenirs or trophies are signatures. These are actions driven by the killer’s psychological needs and fantasies.
Unlike MO, the signature never changes. The perpetrator may refine it, but the basic signature remains the same. For example, if a serial killer poses his victims in a religious manner, such as praying or in a crucifixion posture, he might later add details such as candles, crucifixes, and other ceremonial objects. The details of the signature have changed, but its basic form and theme remains the same.
The reason for the stability of the signature lies in its driving force: the un-sub’s fantasies. These fantasies develop early in life and become refined into an obsession over years of mental reenactment. During the crime, he forces the victim to respond in accordance with the script the unsub has rehearsed in his head thousands of times. His signature actions are solely to live out this personal fantasy, and since this fantasy never changes, the signature remains intact. In the above situation, the religious posing and paraphernalia are an important aspect of the killer’s fantasy, and since this is the reason he committed the act in the first place, all his victims are treated the same way.
This signature is useful in profiling the killer. Religious posing might indicate some issue with religion, church, or a priest, and this would be incorporated into his profile. Also, the signature might serve to link a series of crimes. If several victims are found posed, bound, or killed in a similar manner, the wise investigator would search for other linking clues, since linking crime scenes is often crucial in tracking the killer.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: CARMINE CALABRO 
In 1979, the body of twenty-six-year-old schoolteacher Francine Elveson was found on the roof of her apartment building. She was nude and had been object raped with a pen and an umbrella and mutilated. Her body was placed in a position that reflected the shape of the Chai (the Jewish symbol of good luck). She was known to wear a Chai pendant, but it had apparently been taken as a souvenir by the killer.
The FBI profile of the killer suggested that he was disorganized, since there seemed to be little planning and the scene suggested a fantasy-driven murder. This means he was likely a white male, twenty-five to thirty-five years old, unemployed, and knew the layout of the building and the victim’s habits. In addition, he likely knew the victim or had at least seen her. He knew that the apartment house’s roof would be private enough for him to complete his assault and murder and escape. The ritualistic and sadistic nature of the murder, and the fact that he did not rape the victim himself but used objects, suggested that he was sexually inadequate and had no stable relationships with women. He likely had some form of mental illness and probably had been in a psychiatric hospital at some time.
This profile caused police to focus on Carmine Calabro, a thirty-year-old, unmarried, unemployed male who often visited his father, who lived in the victim’s apartment building. He was undergoing treatment at a psychiatric hospital and had been absent without permission at the time of the murder. He was convicted when his dental anatomy matched bite marks on the victim’s body.
Victimology 
The perpetrator isn’t the only one profiled. Evaluating the victim can add to the offender profile and might offer valuable information to narrow the search for the killer. The study of victim characteristics, called victimology, is basically an assessment of the person’s risk of becoming a victim as a result of his personal, professional, and social life. A detailed understanding of the victim’s lifestyle and habits provides clues as to why this particular victim was selected at this location and time. This information can divide victims into high-, medium-, and low-risk.
High-risk victims are those who are frequently in high-risk situations. Prostitutes, particularly those who “walk the streets,” obviously fall into this category. They typically work at night, interact with strangers on a regular basis, willingly get into cars with strangers, and, in short, are easy targets. Other high-risk behaviors include drug use, a promiscuous lifestyle, nighttime employment, and associating with people who possess criminal personalities.
Low-risk victims are those who stay close to work and home, don’t visit areas unfamiliar to them, have a steady job and many friends, don’t use drugs, and lock their doors at night.
Medium-risk victims fall between these two.
Why the offender selects a particular victim is determined by both the perpetrator’s fantasy needs and the victim’s vulnerability. Some victims are merely grabbed as a victim of opportunity. High-risk victims place themselves in vulnerable positions much more often than do low-risk victims, but either could simply be in the wrong place at the wrong time. Other victims are taken because they fit the starring role in the perpetrator’s fantasy. The offender might spend days or weeks “cruising” for just the right victim, the one who most closely matches his fantasy. He ignores other potentially easy victims because they are not “right.”
A special form of victim profiling is the psychological autopsy. It is performed when the manner of a victim’s death is not clear. Was the victim’s death an accident, suicide, or homicide? To help make this determination, the forensic psychiatrist will look into the victim’s medical, school, work, and military history; interview family, friends, and associates; and evaluate autopsy, police, and witness reports. The goal is to assess whether the victim was in a stressful enough situation and the type of person to take his own life. Or was his lifestyle such that he was an easy target for a killer?
Geographic Profiling 
In nature shows on television, the narrators often discuss a certain predator’s domain or hunting range. Game wardens use these boundaries to narrow their search for an illusive lion or tiger. Profilers do the same with serial killers.
An analysis of the pattern of the perpetrator’s assaults can yield valuable information that might ultimately lead to his apprehension. This analysis is known as geographic profiling. It is based on the premise that serial offenders, like lions and tigers, have a certain “comfort zone” within which they feel free to carry out their crimes. The geographic profiler would like to know where the victim was abducted, where the actual assault or murder took place, and where the body was dumped. If several assaults have occurred, the profiler has several such locations to work with. He can then locate these points on a map and define the killer’s domain.
This might show that the murders are clustered in a small area, which would indicate that the killer is not very mobile and might not possess a car or have a job. Or the range could be broad, indicating that the perpetrator is highly mobile and may possess a vehicle with high mileage that he uses to troll for victims. Whether the range is narrow or broad, the perpetrator likely resides or works within or near this comfort zone.
It is important for investigators to determine which victim was killed first. This is often straightforward if the victims are found shortly after the crime. But, if the victims are street dwellers or prostitutes, whose disappearance might go unnoticed, the date of their abduction might not be known. And if the bodies are dumped in remote places, the order in which the victims were killed might not be the order in which the bodies are found. In such cases, a forensic anthropologist is brought in to assess the approximate time of death (see Chapter Five: Time of Death). Why is this important? The comfort zone for most serial killers usually begins small and grows with each killing. This means that the first victim was probably abducted close to the killer’s home or workplace, and this knowledge can be crucial to identifying the killer.
LINKING CRIMINALS AND CRIME SCENES  
Linking several crime scenes can link evidence, and this is turn might help narrow the suspect pool, possibly to a single individual. Suppose a crime scene in Phoenix is linked by signature to similar scenes in Los Angeles and Las Vegas. Also suppose that a witness in Phoenix saw a tall man leave the area in a blue van, a shoeprint in Los Angeles revealed the killer wore a certain size and model of athletic shoe, and hair found at the scene in Vegas suggested that the killer dyed his blonde hair black. Each piece of evidence alone is fairly meager, but together they present the police with a suspect who is tall, dyes his hair black, wears athletic shoes, and drives a blue van. That’s a lot more to go on. But, how does this linkage happen?
As with the Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS), which allows the matching of fingerprints from various crime scenes and suspects (see Chapter Twelve: Fingerprints), the FBI also created other databases to deal with serial offenders. The first was the National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime (NCAVC). It serves as a repository for violent crime data throughout the country. This led to the development of the Violent Criminal Apprehension Program (VICAP) and PROFILER, which maintains profiles on serial murderers.
Data from crime scenes are entered into these databases. When an investigator is confronted with a murder or a series of murders, he can create a profile of the scene in question and compare it with others from around the country in the hopes of linking the two crimes. For example, if an investigator is analyzing a murder scene in which the victim was strangled with a knotted rope, violated with an object, and had her hands hacked off, he can plug this information into a profile and compare the scene with those in the VICAP and PROFILER databases. Any crimes with similar characteristics are identified and the investigator looks into them to see if perhaps the same perpetrator committed both crimes. If other evidence shows that this is the case, he has linked the two murders and this might ultimately lead him to the killer.
Forensic psychiatry is a difficult if inexact science. In fact, it is more art than science. Whether performing mental status tests, assessing competence, determining the veracity of what a subject says, or profiling an unsub, the forensic psychiatrist must use his training, experience, and common sense to make a “best guess.” In psychiatry, nothing is ever certain. 
