---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0007.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["time", "police", "officer", "one", "thing", "day", "life", "scene", "crime", "must", "like", "eye", "know", "page", "detective", "end", "writer", "write", "author", "moment", "child", "message", "written", "done", "could"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0007html

---


PREFACE
 PREFACEIt is a constant challenge for those of us who write crime fiction to comprehend and interpret for our readers the police officer's reality.— KATE FLORA, EDGAR NOMINATED AUTHOR OF FINDING AMY: A TRUE STORY OF MURDER IN MAINE AND PLAYING GOD: A JOE BURGESS MYSTERYMy twenty-year career in law enforcement was rewarding at times. One of the more gratifying moments was when I received a card in the mail from a woman and a small child with a picture of the two tucked inside. The little girl appeared to be eight or nine years old. A message had been scrawled on the inside flap of the card in thick green crayon. The writing was crude and obviously written by the child, but the message was very clear. She wrote, “Thank you for saving me and my mommy.”Apparently, I had done something in the course of one of my shifts that had seemed so important to her she felt compelled to write me. I did my best to remember what I could have possibly done for them, but nothing stood out in my mind. It could have been any one of a number of things, but that's a cop's job. That's what we do.There are many of those messages out there for police officers — some written and some left unsaid. I always wanted to leave the business as a role model for young people, like other officers were to me when I was a child. Things didn't work out that way, however. I'd come far in achieving my goal, and it all ended with a volley of gunfire and the death of a bank robber. He died almost instantly, but I've suffered for years.I've lived that day over and over in my mind. I can still hear the gunshots and sirens, and if I close my eyes and concentrate, I can still smell burnt gunpowder and gun oil. I remember the moment when the flashing red lights of the ambulance went still. That's the precise moment when I knew in my heart that I had just killed someone.I suppose I'll always wonder if I could have done something differently to spare the young man's life. I think of his family — his parents mainly. I've never met them, but I've grieved with them in my thoughts. Sometimes I feel like calling them to tell them their son lives in my memories, but I know I never will.It's been tough, but I've finally come to terms with the fact that I shot and killed another man. I've also accepted the fact that I can never be alone again. The young robber accompanies me wherever I go. He has since that day and probably always will.It's this kind of gut-wrenching emotion that must pour onto your pages as you write of your heroes saving a community from a serial killer or rescuing a loved one from the path of danger.I was a cop for many years, and, for the majority of that time, I worked as a detective charged with solving major crimes. I, like most police officers, had become complacent with my daily routine: I worked my cases and went through the mundane ritual of processing criminals and shoving them through the revolving doors of the courts and jails.Not every day was dull, but days that would be deemed exciting by the average person were boring to me at best. Drug dealers and dead bodies, sometimes one and the same, began to look alike after a while. Of course, there had been times throughout my career when I'd been scared. If you get right down to it, there were many times when I'd been scared. I've seen the wrong end of a gun a time or two, and I know what the pointed end of a knife looks like. It's my belief that all cops have been frightened at one time or another, but they suck it up and worry about the fear after the situations are over.A crime scene can be an eye-opening event even for the most seasoned police officer, especially the scene of a violent homicide or a particularly gruesome suicide. It takes a special kind of person to deal with the violent end of human life, day in and day out, and to deal with the killers who choose to end those lives. In Police Procedure & Investigation, I'll guide you through the lives of the police officers whose duty it is to solve crimes and to deal with the criminals who commit them. We'll delve into police officer training, their daily routines, and their way of thinking. I'll guide you, the writer, through crime scenes so you see them through my eyes, as I did as a police detective.A good detective gathers evidence — a great detective gathers evidence and looks for things that are not at the scene. The things that are missing are sometimes more important than the things left behind. But more importantly, a great detective will listen to what the dead have to say. Amid the blood and viscera, a body can speak loudly if someone takes the time to listen.As a writer, you're charged with the task of leading your readers behind the scenes and into the macabre workings of murder. You must excite the senses of your audience, and, to do so, you must enter the minds of your characters. You must bear witness to death through the eyes of a killer and peer into the pale, milky eyes of the dead. A mystery author knows the scent of burnt gunpowder and the stickiness of spilled human blood. The writer senses the eerie stillness enveloping the homicide scene and fills the written page with anticipation and trepidation. The author's ink flows until it reaches the last page, just as the victim's blood spills until his last heartbeat.Police Procedure & Investigation is designed specifically for the storyteller. The pages are filled with data, statistics, and things you must know to tell your story.It's time for you, the writer, to leave the comfort of a warm house on a blustery winter night and enter a neighborhood you'd normally ride through in broad daylight with your car doors locked. It's time to touch the ice-cold skin of a bloodless human body and to witness the frenzied carnage of a schizophrenic armed with his weapon of choice — perhaps a knife, or a shotgun at close range.For me, it's time to go to work and to sign 10-8, ready for duty. Please join me as I share a small portion of my life with you.
