---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0012.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["officer", "suspect", "search", "police", "warrant", "arrest", "must", "may", "person", "right", "law", "time", "crime", "court", "rule", "make", "miranda", "case", "without", "evidence", "one", "driver", "see", "car", "item"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0012html

---


5
5ARREST AND SEARCH PROCEDURESBeing an investigative reporter is just like being a cop — you ask questions, examine the evidence, search for clues, interview the suspects. The big difference: there's no journalism Miranda warning. If the bad guys don't already know their rights, we don't have to tell them.— HANK PHILLIPPI RYAN, EMMY AWARD-WINNING INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER AND AUTHOR OF PRIME TIME AND FACE TIMELaw enforcement agencies and departments have minimum standards of operation as delegated by the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Constitution, and local governing bodies. These standards are specific rules, regulations, and laws that direct the actions of law enforcement officers. These regulations also protect the rights of law-abiding citizens and the rights of those who stand accused of crimes.TYPES OF CRIMECrime is divided into two types — felonies and misdemeanors. Felonies, such as rape, robbery, and murder, are the more serious of the two types of crime and are punishable by death or one or more years in a penitentiary, also known as a state or federal prison (county jails are not prisons). Misdemeanors are crimes that aren't considered felonies. Misdemeanors, such as trespassing and simple assault, are less serious in nature than felonies and are punishable by fines, probation, and/or imprisonment in a county or city jail for a period of up to twelve months. Unless otherwise authorized by special provisions in the law, a police officer may only make an arrest for a misdemeanor when the offense has been committed in her presence.To ensure an offender answers for a misdemeanor committed outside her presence, the officer must either issue a summons for the accused criminal or obtain a warrant for his arrest. To obtain an arrest warrant, she must present the facts surrounding the case to a judge or magistrate, who determines if enough probable cause exists to issue the warrant.An officer may issue a written summons for a misdemeanor offense, and, as with traffic citations, the suspect must sign the form indicating his promise to appear in court to answer the charges. Signing a citation isn't an admission of guilt; however, a suspect's refusal to sign a citation gives the officer grounds to take him into custody (a traffic stop is considered an arrest).If the suspect refuses to sign the summons and is arrested (the actual arrest is based upon the original offense, not the refusal to sign), the officer handcuffs him and brings him before a magistrate. The magistrate sets a dollar amount for bail. In some states, the bail is a predetermined amount and can be collected at police headquarters by the arresting officer. The offender is held in police custody until the bail has been paid.Some states have authorized exceptions to the law that says an officer can only make an arrest for a misdemeanor offense committed in her presence. Exceptions have been made for offenses such as driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, in which case further harm or damage may occur if the officer doesn't make an immediate arrest.An officer may make a warrantless arrest for a felony as long as he has sufficient probable cause to believe a felony has been committed and that the person he's arresting is actually the person who committed the felony.Most states prefer that officers obtain arrest warrants whenever possible. (Having an actual warrant in hand seems to somewhat pacify a bad guy — he tends to offer less resistance than those who are arrested for a crime-in-progress). However, if an officer believes the situation requires a warrantless arrest, she must be able to effectively articulate, in a court of law, the conditions and facts that led to that arrest. If her explanation for the arrest doesn't provide ample probable cause, a judge may deem the arrest illegal. The suspect may bring civil proceedings and/or criminal charges against the arresting officer.An officer's most important tool is his credibility. If he falters in the course of his duties by performing an illegal arrest, exposing his lack of knowledge of the law and his ability to follow and enforce the law, his career as a police officer will begin to decline. His testimonies will become questionable and he'll begin to lose court cases, which sends guilty suspects back onto the streets. It's essential for a police officer to make every effort to be certain of the facts when making an arrest. Cutting corners doesn't pay.ARREST WARRANTSOnce an officer presents the facts in a criminal case to a judge or magistrate and receives an arrest warrant, she may then legally take the suspect into custody. The difficult part of serving a warrant (other than the danger factor) is that criminals aren't always home when police arrive to serve them with an arrest warrant. Sometimes it takes several days or more to locate a suspect.If an officer can't locate a suspect, he returns the warrant for her arrest to the police department, where it's placed on file. The warrant is now considered an outstanding warrant. Officers working the next shifts pick up any leftover warrants and attempt to serve them. If, within a few days, the suspect still can't be located, her information (name, birth date, a physical description, social security number, driver's license number, and nature of offense) is entered into the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) database. Then, if the suspect is stopped by the police for any reason, including a traffic offense, officers will know she's a wanted person.ROUTINE TRAFFIC STOPS AND PENDING WARRANTSTo outsiders a traffic stop seems like a routine procedure, but it can be an adrenaline roller-coaster ride for police officers because of the many moments of high-to-low-anxiety.When stopping a driver for a traffic infraction a police officer automatically does two things: She checks to see if the car's license plate is valid and she checks to see if the driver's license is legal or restricted. When the officer pulls up behind a car, she reads the license number (in some departments, a 10-28 is a request for a vehicle license check) to the dispatcher, who enters the information into the NCIC database. Almost instantly, all information regarding that particular license number (type and color of car, who the car is licensed to, if the car is stolen or wanted, and the dates of license validity) is relayed back to the dispatcher. He then provides the information to the officer.If the response indicates that the car and driver are wanted, the officer requests assistance and simply follows behind the car until her backup arrives. If no “wants” are reported, the officer activates her lights and siren to begin the traffic stop.During the beginning of her traffic stop the officer must be constantly aware of her surroundings. She must run through a complete mental checklist of “What if?” questions: Is the driver dangerous? Has he been drinking? Does he have a gun? Does he have a hostage? Is this a setup? Could there be someone waiting in the trunk for an ambush? Is the car carrying illegal drugs or weapons? How will the driver react to receiving a traffic citation? Will he become combative? The officer has only seconds to complete this entire evaluation.During her approach to the car the officer places her hand on the trunk lid to make sure it's tightly closed (no ambush), glances into the back seat (no one there, no dead bodies, and no large satchels full of cocaine and machine guns), and then approaches the driver's side of the car (if the stop is made in heavy traffic, she may approach the passenger's side). Her initial conversation with the driver determines if he's under the influence of alcohol or drugs. If he's unusually nervous it can be a good indicator that he's just committed a crime or is wanted by the police. She must rely heavily on her instincts and gut feelings while still following the letter of the law. She must protect the driver's rights while making sure she's able to go home, alive, at the end of her shift.A police officer automatically has the right to ask a person to step out of his car. This right ensures the officer's safety. Believe me, there's nothing worse for a police officer than stopping a car with tinted windows, in the middle of the night, and not being able to see what's going on inside the vehicle. Having the person step outside can be the difference between the officer living or dying. If every person could experience that gut-wrenching feeling, they might feel a little less inconvenienced when ordered out of their cars by police officers.When she performs the last item on her checklist and decides this is just a normal traffic stop, the officer asks to see the driver's license (some states call them operator's licenses) and proof of insurance. She takes both back to her patrol car and makes a second call to the dispatcher — a 10-27, the check of a driver's license. The dispatcher enters the driver's license number and issuing state into the computer, and a reply is once again returned almost instantly.The check reveals a person's entire driving history, such as the number of traffic citations received nationwide, and it confirms that the person's license is either valid, suspended, or that he actually has no license. Simultaneously, the dispatcher runs a check to see if the driver is wanted by police. If the check reveals that the driver has outstanding warrants, the dispatcher must immediately notify the officer without alerting the suspect that they're on to him. Instead of using the word “wanted” over the radio, the dispatcher makes the announcement using the 10-code. In some locations 10-99 means “wanted person.” If a want is returned, backup is sent to the officer's location to assist her with arresting the driver. For her safety, she should remain in her patrol car until help arrives. (For more on 10-codes, see appendix B.)If the driver is charged with any type of infraction, including speeding, the officer requests that a printout of all the driver's records be held for her. This is done because the officer will need to enclose the printouts in her files for use as evidence in later court hearings.The NCIC printout also serves as a temporary arrest warrant for a wanted person and provides the officer with just cause to detain him until he's picked up by the department that's looking for him.Any police officer who makes an arrest based upon an arrest warrant or NCIC printout is doing so in good faith and may not be charged with making an illegal arrest.In order for an officer to legally arrest someone, he must make the person aware that she's “under arrest.” The officer must make it clear to the suspect that he's a law enforcement official and has the proper authority to make an arrest. Officers are required to identify themselves as police officers. Undercover officers must give verbal identification and show their badges of authority. When a uniformed officer makes an arrest, his uniform and badge is evidence enough of his authority.INITIAL SUSPECT ENGAGEMENTThe rules concerning the initial engagement of a suspect depend upon the officer's knowledge of that suspect and the crime at the time of the confrontation. The rules vary, depending upon whether the officer suspects the person of the crime or simply believes the person knows something about the crime but isn't involved. Either way, a law enforcement officer may stop and hold, or detain, someone if she has a reasonable suspicion that the person is involved in a crime or has knowledge of a crime. For her own safety, the officer may handcuff the suspect, but if at any time she decides the suspect has no knowledge of criminal activity, she must release him immediately.Every person in the United States, resident or visitor, is required to supply basic information, if asked, to a law enforcement officer. Courts have ruled that an officer may legally ask for a person's name, address, and social security number, and the person is required to supply that information upon request.An officer who has personal knowledge of the facts of a crime, but doesn't have probable cause to make an arrest, may briefly detain a suspect for the sole purpose of answering general questions — name, address, social security number. For example, let's say an officer knows that a robbery has just occurred at a convenience store. The clerk states the suspect was wearing a white T-shirt and jeans. Upon his arrival, the officer sees a young man walking away from the scene of the crime wearing a white T-shirt and jeans. The officer has the right to stop, hold, and question the suspect.If the officer detains the suspect longer than is reasonably necessary to obtain general information (name, address, etc.), the stop becomes an arrest, and the rules of search and seizure based upon the Fourth Amendment — protection against unreasonable searches — as well as the rules of the Fifth Amendment — protection against self-incrimination — go into effect.THE STOP AND FRISK SEARCHIf an officer believes a suspect may be concealing or carrying an illegal weapon, he may go one step further and frisk, or “pat down,” the suspect. Keep in mind that officers must have facts to conduct a search, not merely a hunch, a gut feeling, or even a really good guess. The pat down search must be quick, and the officer may only perform it to search for weapons. Any other items discovered during this brief search may not be used as evidence, since their seizure would be considered the fruit of an illegal search, even if those items were later determined to be key items of evidence in a major case. Even if officers found a key piece of evidence that solved a string of murders, it couldn't be used. A pat down search may be conducted without arresting the suspect.The rule of law that authorizes the stop and frisk of a suspect for weapons is based on the ruling in the precedent-setting case Terry v. Ohio. In this case a police officer observed a group of men pacing back and forth in front of a store. Upon each passing, the men would stop, peer into the windows, and then confer with one another. Soon they were joined by another man who also began to peer into the store.Based on his years of experience and training, the officer believed the three men were acting suspiciously and were possibly planning to rob the store. He thought a proactive approach was best in this instance, so he walked over to them. In light of the situation, and for his own safety, the officer decided to frisk the men for weapons. During the pat down search, he discovered two handguns and charged the men with carrying concealed weapons. They were each convicted and, during the appeal process, their convictions were affirmed by the Supreme Court of the United States.The court determined that a police officer need not be concerned with normal probable cause standards if she believes someone is illegally carrying concealed weapons. The officer need only consider the reasonableness surrounding the situation — and if she believes a crime has been, or is about to be, committed that could jeopardize someone's safety — she may legally conduct the pat down search without violating the suspect's rights. The Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees this.THE ARREST PROCESSAn arrest can be defined as an incident in which a person's freedom has been denied or reduced by law enforcement. An arrest doesn't always mean that a person is handcuffed or placed in a jail cell. An act as simple as telling a suspect that he's no longer free to leave the police station may constitute an arrest. Once a person's liberty has been denied, he must be formally charged with a crime. If not, he must be released.The law doesn't specify a length of time that law enforcement may hold a suspect prior to issuing official charges, but it does state that the time frame must be reasonable. It's a very gray area of the law. A person who is held without cause or without being formally charged may file suit against the officers and/or the department where she was held. However, since the law is so vague, it's difficult to win a case of this nature unless the suspect can prove that the period of time was extensive and unreasonable.A police officer may not remove a suspect from the place of questioning without making an arrest or without the suspect's permission. For example, if an officer shows up at a suspect's house, he can't legally force her to accompany him to the police station. She must either go with the officer voluntarily, or he must place her under arrest.A person taken away in a police car does not, no matter how amiable the circumstances, normally feel free to leave. During the ride to the police station, the feeling of loss of liberty is reinforced because she's seated in a caged compartment. She's also separated from the officers by a heavy screen, and she can open neither the rear doors nor the windows from the inside. At that point, many people begin to feel that they're in police custody even if they've agreed to go with the officer.To some people, a mere visit to a police station constitutes a feeling of imprisonment, especially police stations and sheriff's offices that also contain county or city jails. The individual must pass through electronically controlled gates, fences topped with razor wire, and steel doors that lock behind him after he passes through.Inside is a flurry of activity. A suspect is often asked to empty his pockets and is searched for weapons and contraband. Armed police officers are everywhere — walking from office to office, escorting handcuffed prisoners, and talking to one another in cop lingo. Masked, undercover officers (undercover officers wear masks inside police stations to prevent the general public from learning their identities) gather weapons and restraints from the armory. Somewhere deep in the building, officers and prisoners can be heard arguing. An inmate wearing an orange jumpsuit scrubs the floor. Dozens of police radios constantly crackle and hiss canned voices. It's all very intimidating, especially for a first-time visitor or offender.RESISTING ARRESTPeople are required by law to comply with an officer who's making a lawful arrest. Any attempt to physically defy that arrest can, and usually does, result in the officer charging the suspect with the crime of resisting arrest. Law enforcement officials may escalate their level of force to meet the resistance and to bring the subject under control.A person who hasn't committed a crime and runs away or hides from police isn't resisting arrest. The resistance must be some form of physical contact, such as hitting, kicking, or in some way struggling to avoid the arrest.In the case of an unlawful arrest (when a police officer attempts to arrest an innocent person), the suspect has the legal right to resist, but she'd better be prepared to offer the judge a very good and believable reason for her resistance. Defendants in resisting cases rarely ever prevail. On the other hand, just because a suspect can't be found doesn't mean she's a fugitive. She must know the police are actively looking for her to be labeled and charged as a fugitive. For example, the suspect may have been formally charged for a crime, arrested, and then released on bond. If she doesn't appear for her trial, she'd be considered a fugitive.For the safety of the officer, it's best to force combative suspects to the ground. Handcuffing is also easier when an aggressive suspect is in a prone position.An undercover officer who doesn't properly identify himself may cause a person to resist arrest, thinking she's being improperly detained by someone other than a law enforcement officer. Sometimes even those officers who do offer proper identification find themselves in the middle of a scuffle. Some offenders find it difficult to be arrested by a man with long hair and a beard or a petite woman wearing a miniskirt.USE OF FORCE DURING AN ARRESTAn officer may use whatever force is necessary to make an arrest. If all that's needed to get a suspect to comply is a verbal command to place his hands behind his back for handcuffing, that's all the force necessary. If a suspect becomes combative or resists arrest, an officer may escalate her use of force to meet the level of the suspect's resistance. If at any time she feels that her life or the life of another is in jeopardy, she may resort to the use of deadly force.There are more nonlethal weapons available today than ever before in a police officer's arsenal. The devices listed below provide officers with many options before they're forced to use deadly force.Concussion grenades. Small, explosive devices commonly referred to by police officers as flash-bangs. Search warrant and special weapons and tactics (SWAT) teams toss these grenade-like devices into houses and buildings. A team's goal when using concussion grenades is to divert the criminal's attention away from the police officers, allowing the officers safe entry to the structure.Shock sticks. Nightstick-like weapons, also known as electric batons, with two electrodes on one end capable of delivering a low-voltage shock with the push of a button. The stick is used in a manner similar to a cattle prod.Beanbag projectiles. Cloth sacks filled with lead shot that are designed to be fired from twelve-gauge shotguns. They're normally used during riot situations.ASP expandable batons. Metal batons with retractable sections that fold inward like a telescope. When the baton is in its fully retracted position, an officer can carry it in a small leather case on his gun belt, or, if he's a plainclothes officer, inside his back pocket.Two-handed riot batons. Thirty-six inch batons made from wood (hickory) or hardened plastic. Officers and tactical response teams (TRTs) normally use these sticks for crowd control and riots. (Note that tact teams are used for riot and crowd control, duties not normally assigned to SWAT teams.) Prison guards often use them during prison riots.Electric police jacket. Jackets worn during riots to protect police of-ficers against a hand-to-hand attack. The jackets shock anyone who touches them.Stun belt. Device placed around the waists of prisoners to prevent combative behavior. Officers carry a remote control device that, when activated, delivers a debilitating electric shock to the prisoner. This device is often used on jail and prison inmates, or by police officers when transporting violent suspects.Noise-or sound-impulse devices. Devices that deliver loud, repetitive audio impulses, noise, or even annoying music. Irritating noises will often cause suspects to surrender to police just to get away from the intense sounds.Pepper spray (oleoresin capsicum). An inflammatory agent derived from the fruits of capsicum (chili-pepper) plants. When a suspect is sprayed, his eyes close immediately and he begins to cough uncontrollably. The effect of the spray lasts for approximately thirty to forty minutes.Freeze Plus P spray. A combination of pepper spray and tear gas (or-thochlorobenzalmalonitrile). This combination creates a synergistic effect, with each chemical magnifying the other. Freeze Plus P will penetrate wet or greased skin, as well as entering the body through inhalation.The Wrap. A nylon restraint device that can be wrapped around the torso and arms and legs of a combative person, rendering her almost motionless. The Wrap is held securely in place by wide strips of Velcro. Smaller versions of the Wrap are also available for use on just arms or legs. Police officers often use the Wrap when dealing with extremely violent suspects. The device allows officers to safely transport their prisoners to a nearby jail.Rubber bullets. A nonlethal means to disperse riots. The bullets are made from rubber and are fired from many types of firearms. Death can occur if the rubber projectiles are fired at someone at close range.THE RIGHT TO REMAIN SILENTThe Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution protects citizens against double jeopardy (being tried twice for the same offense). This amendment also provides citizens with the right to due process of the law and the right to just compensation in the case of eminent domain, in which the government takes a person's property for public use. Finally, the amendment protects citizens against self-incrimination, giving them the right to remain silent during questioning by police.THE FIFTH AMENDMENTNo person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actual service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb, nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation.In the course of any given day, police officers all across the country stop people just to talk to them. They ask questions, and they ask citizens for their permission to search them, their vehicles, their property, and their homes. This is all part of a proactive attempt to enforce the law and is quite legal.No one who is not, or has not been, engaged in criminal activity is required to answer any officer's questions, except to provide basic information, such as his name, address, and social security number (although, believe it or not, not everyone knows his social security number). Criminals are expected to answer an officer's questions, although they rarely do. No one is required to allow officers to search him or his property without a warrant. On the other hand, since these people aren't in custody, officers aren't required to tell them they have the right to remain silent. Thinking they have to answer, and knowing they possess illegal items, many people admit their wrongdoings and grant officers permission to conduct searches. And every day officers make arrests for the contraband they find.MIRANDA WARNINGSOn June 13, 1966, the four Miranda warnings (the right to remain silent; anything said can be used in a court of law; the right to the presence of an attorney; and if an attorney cannot be afforded one will be appointed prior to any questioning) were mandated by the Supreme Court of the United States as a means of protecting a criminal suspect against self-incrimination, a right guaranteed us by the Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.Miranda warnings originated with a precedent-setting court case, Miranda v. Arizona. Ernesto Miranda was arrested for the slaying of a young woman in the mid-1960s. Miranda was taken into custody for the murder and later confessed, in detail, to the killing. During the questioning, detectives didn't tell Miranda that he didn't have to talk to the police, nor did they tell him he could have an attorney with him to aid in the questioning process.In 1966, on appeal, the Supreme Court of the United States, with a 5-4 vote, ruled it unconstitutional that Miranda hadn't been advised of these basic rights. They went even further to rule that Miranda's statements couldn't be used against him in court. The prosecution had other evidence sufficient for a conviction, so, in a second trial, Miranda was convicted and sentenced to serve time in the penitentiary. (An interesting fact: Ernesto Miranda was released from prison after time served and was killed in a barroom fight. Ironically, his killer was advised of his rights according to Miranda v. Arizona. He chose to remain silent.)We've all watched TV police detectives and patrol officers slap cuffs on a suspect and immediately begin advising the person of his rights. This is a TV falsehood that's designed to provide action for our entertainment. An officer is only required by law to read the Miranda warnings before questioning a suspect in police custody, not immediately upon arresting him. In fact, most officers don't advise a suspect of Miranda warnings at the time of arrest. I can think of many words that are exchanged between officers and suspects during and after a scuffle, but Miranda isn't one of them. Many of the words used during the heat of the moment are of the four-letter variety.The law draws no firm line that determines when a person is in police custody. The rule of thumb is that a person is in police custody when she no longer feels she can leave the immediate area. A suspect who is handcuffed or sitting in a locked room inside a police station obviously can't leave and is definitely in custody.Miranda warnings don't apply if an officer is speaking with a suspect and gives him no indication that he's in custody. This is true even if he's the sole suspect in a crime. Suspects sometimes claim they were tricked or coerced into talking with the police. They rarely ever win this argument.It's common practice for police departments to have a preprinted waiver-of-rights form for the suspect to sign, stating she's been advised, agrees to waive her rights, and wishes to speak with the officers. The suspect, the questioning officer, and a witness — usually another officer — sign these forms.An officer must obtain an affirmative answer from the suspect for all of the above before he may begin questioning. Should the suspect request an attorney, the officer may not question her, and the interview must cease. No further questioning of the suspect is permitted without her permission and/or the permission of her attorney.Even if a suspect initially agrees to talk to an officer, he can change his mind at any time during the investigation and assert his right to remain silent. If an officer persists in questioning a suspect after he has asked for his attorney, any statements he makes after that point must not be used against him in court. This scenario does occur — officers sometimes become excited or get carried away during stressful cases and continue their attempts to pry a confession from a suspect. Sometimes their illegal efforts are successful, but the cases are often overturned on appeal. This is a very difficult case for the defense to prove, but it does happen.The officer should repeat the reading of these rights prior to each session of questioning or after any lapse in questioning, such as a lunch break.If a person is merely a witness (not a suspect at this point in time) to a crime, an officer doesn't have to advise her of the Miranda warnings during questioning. However, if at any time the person shows involvement in the crime, she immediately becomes a suspect, and the officer must advise her of her rights according to Miranda v. Arizona.There are certain instances in which a person can be interviewed and interrogated without being in police custody, such as when a suspect initiates the interview. If a suspect voluntarily comes to a police station, asks to speak with investigators, and provides details of his involvement in a crime, he's not considered to have been in custody during the questioning.Incriminating statements made voluntarily don't fall under the custody rule of thumb; therefore, these statements are normally allowed into court as evidence, as are statements that are deemed to be spontaneous or excited utterances.A spontaneous utterance is a statement made by someone in an animated state as part of her reaction to a particularly exciting event, such as a murder or an armed robbery. Courts have found that statements made during times of excitement are statements of truth. Lies take time to formulate.It's good practice for a police officer to advise a suspect of the Miranda warnings each time he questions her to avoid problems in court. It's better to be safe than sorry, or to see a killer walk away free because of something the officers did or didn't do.Once a person appears in court, he's no longer considered a suspect in the crime. He has become a defendant, and the officer can no longer question him without his attorney's permission.Prisoners are incarcerated twenty-four hours a day and are definitely not free to leave their surroundings. However, courts have ruled that Miranda warnings and the custody rule-of-thumb don't automatically apply to prisoners who commit crimes while incarcerated, since they're free to move about the prison grounds and aren't always confined to a cell. If an interview takes place in a cell, the “in-custody” rule applies.It's a different story if the interview is conducted in the prison recreation yard or other areas where prisoners are free to roam at will. In these areas, prisoners aren't technically considered to be in custody according to the rule; therefore, officers may ask general questions without advising the prisoner of his rights according to Miranda. IN THE LINE OF DUTY “MOUNTAIN MAN”For all writers, character development is critical. For mystery writers, delving into every character's life, no matter which side of the crime line that character stands on, is crucial. If we don't understand the experiences of criminals and convicts, we cannot add the depth to our stories that our readers deserve.— BECKY LEVINE, WRITER AND EDITORThere was a powerhouse of a man we called “Mountain Man.” This giant redneck lived in the country and, for his weekend recreation, loved to come into the city and drink, which always resulted in a fight he never lost. I saw many officers try to arrest him, and they were constantly tossed around like flies.I had the unfortunate task, one fall night, of responding to a complaint from a local bar. The owner called to say that there was a monster of a man inside who was extremely intoxicated. The bartender had refused to serve the man, who then became violent. The club's three bouncers had tried to toss him outside, but that proved to be an enormous mistake. The man threw two of the bouncers through the glass front door, and the other wound up in the hospital emergency room with an assortment of broken ribs.I was the first officer to arrive. I called in via radio to see how long before my backup would arrive, and I found out that everyone was tied up on a shooting complaint. Deciding I had no choice, I grabbed my flashlight, swallowed really hard a couple of times, felt to be sure my gun was on my side, and went inside. My fears were correct. It was indeed Mountain Man, and he'd already destroyed the inside of the bar. I don't think he'd left a single table or chair standing.He saw me and grinned. Backing into a corner, he motioned with both hands for me to come and get him. The jukebox behind him glowed eerily through a cloud of cigarette smoke, and the mood lighting from the dance floor did nothing to tone down the situation. It was time to swallow hard again.Everyone in the bar was waiting to see what I would do. It was pretty well known in the area that I held a black belt in the martial arts. I owned my own gym and martial arts school where I taught classes, and I was an instructor for defensive tactics at the police academy.The room was silent, and I could hear Mountain Man breathing. In the distance, I actually thought I heard a drum playing, but soon realized that the sound was my own heart pounding inside my chest. I think it wanted to get out so it wouldn't have to be a part of the beating I was about to receive. Between snorts and snarls, the big man again motioned for me to come to the corner and get him. I took a couple of steps in his direction before I stopped and told him he was under arrest — that I didn't want to hurt him and he needed to make it easy on himself. I told him, in my most authoritative voice, to turn around so I could put the handcuffs on him. Right! But it sounded good.A couple of people in the crowd chuckled at hearing my brave words. I actually grinned a bit, too. It was a dumb thing to say, given the circumstances.I knew I would only have one chance at this guy, so I walked toward him until I was within arm's distance and looked him directly in the eyes. His breath reeked of alcohol, stale cigarette smoke, and onion dip. I could feel a faint hint of a breeze around my knees because my legs were shaking just enough to make my pant legs flutter.We stared at one another like gunfighters in an Old West town.Without another word, I hit him as hard as I could right between the eyes with my flashlight. The metal light broke into two pieces, and the four batteries tumbled to the floor. So did Mountain Man. I rolled him over, clicked on the cuffs, and called for the dispatcher to send an ambulance. Being the tight-knit group that cops are, and given the fact that the dispatcher had sent me to arrest the giant single-handedly, she asked if I was all right, instantly assuming I was the injured one. When I told her the ambulance was for the suspect, the male voice of a co-worker came across the radio. “What happened, did he pass out before you got there?”The flashlight incident was talked about for several years and, to this day, I still hear an occasional comment about it. I do know that, from that night forward, whenever we were dispatched to arrest Mountain Man, I never had any further trouble from him. He would stop in mid-fight or argument when I arrived and would immediately turn around to allow me to place the leg irons around his wrists. (That's right — regular handcuffs wouldn't fit his massive wrists.)They don't teach you the flashlight move in the police academy or in the martial arts, but they didn't tell me I should come in out of the rain, either.Some things you just know.SEARCH AND SEIZUREThe Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution governs and restricts the powers of law enforcement officers to conduct searches of persons and property. Police officers are thoroughly trained in the laws of search and seizure. An officer has a very simple rule to follow when conducting searches: She must have a reasonable belief, based on reasonable sources of information, that evidence of a crime is located within the area to be searched. The search can't be based on a mere suspicion, but the officer doesn't have to be completely certain that the information prompting the search is a fact.THE FOURTH AMENDMENTThe right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.Search warrants are much more difficult for a police officer to obtain than television would lead us to believe. Strict requirements, governed by the U.S. Constitution and the courts, must be met. The time and location of the search must be very specific. The items the police are searching for must be detailed on the warrant, and the persons they're searching for must be accurately described and identified by scars, marks, tattoos, and social security numbers, if available.The rule of thumb for obtaining a search warrant is simple. If a police officer can't readily see an item and has to move something to see that item, his action is considered a search, and he needs a warrant. If an object is in plain view, the officer doesn't need a warrant (as long as he has just cause to be in a position to view that item).For example, let's say that an officer is dispatched to a residence where domestic violence has occurred and — in the course of speaking with the residents — she sees a stack of microwave ovens in the corner. She knows a thief has been stealing microwave ovens in the neighborhood, and she even has the list of stolen serial numbers in her notebook. However, she can't touch the ovens to turn them over and check for matching numbers. She'll need a search warrant to do so. Now, I believe there would be enough probable cause to get that warrant, but the officer must leave the premises to do so. Were I in this position, I'd call for backup and have other officers stand guard outside and around the residence to assure no one disposed of the microwave ovens until I returned with the search warrant.The officer applying for a search warrant must state under oath that the facts in the affidavit are true. The judge reviews the document, questions the officer regarding the reliability of the information, and issues and signs the search warrant. The entire search warrant process could take anywhere from a couple of hours to several months depending on the complexity and extensiveness of the investigation. The actual paperwork and approval by a judge can be completed in less than an hour.Once the search warrant is signed by a judge, the officer's work has only just begun. There's a stringent time frame that must be followed to execute and serve the search warrant. There are hard-and-fast rules of law governing how the warrant must be served.A search warrant, to retain its effectiveness, should be served as soon as possible after the court has issued it. Any delay could provide the suspect ample time to hide, destroy, alter, or dispose of the sought-after evidence. After servicing the warrant, the officer must fill out a detailed inventory of the items seized and return that list and the warrant to the court within three days (seventy-two hours) after executing the search (the seventy-two hour time limit may vary depending upon the locality).How the officer must serve, or execute, the warrant depends entirely upon the situation. The knock and announce rule of law requires an officer to knock first and then announce (through a closed door) her intention to serve a search warrant. She must then wait a reasonable time (a specific time frame hasn't been ruled upon) for someone to answer the door before resorting to extreme methods of gaining entry (we'll look at the exception to this rule shortly).EXCLUSIONARY RULEThe exclusionary rule is a protection of a suspect's rights against illegal searches and the illegal seizure of property and evidence during that search. The rule simply states that no illegally obtained evidence may be used against a defendant.If the officer checks the serial numbers on the aforementioned microwave ovens without first obtaining the warrant, and if she finds the entire stack to be stolen property, she can't use this information, no matter how incriminating, as evidence in court. The evidence is inadmissible because it was obtained during an illegal search.The defense attorney would file a motion to suppress the evidence, and the court would be forced to grant the motion. This situation could very well result in nonprosecution, and the defendant would be set free as if nothing had happened. An illegal search can also result in civil or criminal proceedings against the officers involved and the department or disciplinary proceedings against the officers. Termination of employment is another possibility for the officers.A search warrant is normally written to cover a suspect's entire house and property. Judges normally require separate warrants to search people other than the residents of the home. However, for safety purposes, officers may handcuff and frisk everyone inside the house. Any people not listed on the warrant or who aren't involved in the crime in question may be released as soon as it's safe to do so. Separate warrants are also required for vehicles located on the property.Some courts have ruled it unconstitutional for police officers to search the room of a minor child if the child keeps his room locked, preventing parents from having ready access. The same holds true for people who rent a room in someone's house. Police may not search the room of a tenant without a separate search warrant.An officer can only conduct a search until she's found the item, or items, listed in the search warrant. If the officer is looking for a stolen gun and finds that gun beside the front door, she can't go any further into the residence. However, officers may seize any illegal items, in addition to the items listed on the warrant, found during a legal search.At the time of arrest, a police officer may search the arrested person and the area immediately surrounding the suspect without a search warrant. This search is allowed for the officer's safety and to eliminate the suspect's means of escape. Any evidence the officer seizes at this time isn't subject to the exclusionary rule.An officer doesn't need a search warrant if the owner of the property, or any person (including a husband or wife) having control of the property, gives consent for the officer to search. The officer should obtain consent in writing to avoid possible disputes. Most departments have preprinted consent-to-search forms available.The word curtilage, another important term used by police and other law enforcement officials, is found quite often in the body of a search warrant. Curtilage refers to the area surrounding a house or home, such as a wooded area or toolshed, which is frequented by the homeowners or residents.AFFIDAVIT FOR SEARCH WARRANTTo obtain a search warrant, the requesting officer must submit a sworn affidavit for search warrant before a judge or an appropriate officer of the court, such as a magistrate. The affidavit is a very precise and a very detailed document, and it must contain clear-cut information based upon specific facts, not assumptions.An affidavit for search warrant is divided into sections, with each section pertaining to a specific item of the desired search.SEARCH WARRANT FORMThe wording of a search warrant varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. The sample below shows the basic wording common to all search warrants.EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCESThe only exception to the knock and announce rule is found in exigent circumstances. Webster's dictionary defines exigent as demanding, exacting, or requiring immediate action. Obviously, if a SWAT team is serving a search warrant at the residence of a suspect who has shot and killed three police officers, the SWAT supervisor won't knock on the front door and politely wait for the suspect to answer. This type of search warrant service involves exigent circumstances, and an officer may serve it under cover of night and with a heavily armed, well-protected entry team. This team would likely set off flash-bangs for diversion and then enter the residence by force, taking the suspect — hopefully — by surprise. The safety of all involved, including the suspect and innocent bystanders, is the ultimate goal for the officer, along with achieving the purpose of the warrant.Gathering the information needed for the affidavit can take days, weeks, months, and even years. The process can involve long hours of surveillance, covert undercover operations, and vast hours of manpower. Obtaining a search warrant is one of the most arduous duties of any detective, but also one of the most rewarding, when she recovers the murder weapon or stash of drugs.Television and movies depict cops stampeding their way into the homes and warehouses of the drug dealers and their labs. There's always a shootout and the good guys always win. There are times, unfortunately, when a search yields nothing at all, except embarrassment. There's no worse feeling than to conduct numerous hours, days, and even months of surveillance on the property of a suspected criminal and then — when you think the time is right — kick in the door and rush in, followed by the entire entry team with weapons drawn, only to find that you've accidentally gone into the neighbor's home. It happens.Day after day, police officers throughout the country serve search warrants. Sometimes they find what they're looking for; other times they don't. Patience is a huge part of the search warrant game. The investigator who gathers intelligence is like a spider waiting for a fly — sooner or later, the insect will make a mistake and fly into the web of the spider. Then, like the spider, the officer must move quickly and capture his reward. That's how a cop feels when a well-planned raid is properly executed — like she's received a reward.WARRANTLESS SEARCH AND SEIZURESA search warrant isn't always required to make a lawful search and seizure. Let's take a closer look at the exceptions.PLAIN VIEWAn officer doesn't need a search warrant to view something that's in plain view. In fact, many narcotics arrests stem from suspects leaving their “stash” lying on a car seat or console where an officer can readily see it during a common traffic stop. The plain view rule even extends to an officer seeing illegal items through the windows of a suspect's home, as long as the officer has a just reason for being in a position to see inside the window. For example, let's say an officer approaches someone's front door to ask him a question regarding something that's happened in the neighborhood. While standing on the front porch she can clearly see inside the house through a glass storm door. Inside the room she sees a kilo of cocaine, scales, and packaging material lying on a table. She may use that sighting as probable cause for a search warrant. The plain view rule even extends so far as to allow the officer to go into the home without a search warrant if there's reason to believe the evidence will be destroyed or removed before a warrant can be obtained.PLAIN TOUCHDuring pat down searches for weapons, an officer often discovers items that aren't guns or knives. If, based on his training and years of experience, he immediately recognizes that an object is illegal, he may seize it. However, he must be able to satisfactorily articulate what led him to that conclusion.Officers are taught the word articulate and its meaning early in police academy training. More often than not, unclear testimony leads to the dismissal of the suspect's charges.
