---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_010.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["forensic", "evidence", "crime", "lab", "may", "science", "medical", "coroner", "many", "expert", "scene", "death", "examiner", "state", "scientific", "criminal", "area", "suspect", "pathologist", "law", "investigation", "testing", "system", "might", "also"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit010html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 1 
FORENSIC  SCIENCE:
THE HISTORY AND ORGANIZATION  
What is forensic science? Where did it originate? What does the term forensic mean in the first place?
The short definition of forensic is “of the law.” The longer one is “relating to the use of science in the investigation of criminal activity and the analysis and presentation of evidence before the court.” Thus, forensic science is the interface of science and the law. Medico-legal, a term often substituted for forensic, clearly indicates this marriage between law and medical science.
The word forensic derives from the Latin word forum. In ancient Rome, the forum was the community meeting place within the city or town. It served as an area where merchants, politicians, scholars, and the public could mingle and discuss issues of common interest, and also as the place where justice was meted out in public trials. Over the centuries, the term forum evolved into forensics.
Today, forensic is applied to anything that relates to law, and forensic science is the application of scientific disciplines to the law. It is important to note that it differs from the term clinical, which means “related to a medical clinic.”
For example, clinical toxicology is the analysis of medications and drugs in the care of medical patients. Is the level of a drug such as digitalis within a heart patient’s bloodstream at the proper level to achieve the desired effect? Are the person’s symptoms due to an excess of a particular drug? The clinical toxicologist is concerned with patient care and treatment.
On the other hand, forensic toxicology is the use of the principles and testing procedures of medical toxicology (the study or drugs and poisons) to help resolve legal issues. Did the victim die from a poison or a drug overdose? Was the erratic driver intoxicated? Was a suspect’s aberrant behavior due to drug usage? Forensic toxicology helps answer these questions.
A forensics (crime) lab is quite different from a medical (clinical) lab. The latter deals with the living. Testing within the clinical or hospital lab is directed toward aiding the diagnosis and treatment of ill patients. A forensics lab is geared toward evidence testing in the hope of establishing a link between a suspect and a crime.
Another example is the difference between a clinical (hospital) pathologist and a forensic pathologist, who sits at the apex of the forensics investigative system. Just as with labs, the duties of a forensic pathologist and a clinical pathologist vary greatly. A clinical pathologist is concerned with helping other physicians treat the ill. In this regard, he oversees the clinical lab, interprets lab tests, reviews biopsy and surgically removed tissues, and performs medical autopsies. A medical autopsy is designed to determine why someone died and to discover what complicating disease processes may have been present.
The forensic pathologist is concerned with criminal harm and death. He may oversee the crime lab (not always, since more often than not, the crime lab falls under the wing of the police or sheriff’s department), interpret forensic tests, and perform forensic autopsies. A forensic autopsy is also designed to explain why someone died or was injured; however, the focus is to determine if either resulted from a criminal act.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF FORENSIC SCIENCE  
No one knows for sure when science was first used to help solve criminal cases, but many feel that the origins of forensic science can be dated to Chinese investigator Sung Tz’u (1186–1249), who published the first text on forensic science in 1235. It carried the rather poetic title Hsi Yuan Lu, or The Washing Away of Wrongs.
The field of forensic science evolved in fits and spurts over the centuries that followed. Some techniques developed early and progressed rapidly, others lagged behind, and still others are truly modern. No forensic technique simply jumped into existence; it followed its own unique evolutionary process.
Modern forensic science rests on a foundation of centuries of scientific discovery. Our knowledge of physical and biological principles had to evolve and expand before it could be applied to the world of forensics. DNA testing could not become an accepted procedure until we knew it existed and understood how it worked. Fingerprints could not be used for identification until we discovered their existence and uniqueness.
Before a technique finds its way into the forensics lab, it must be thoroughly tested and refined by the scientific community. New techniques are sure to face legal challenges, so the scientific community must find them acceptable. Virtually every forensic science technique, including procedures in firearms examination, toxicology, and serology (the study of blood and body fluids), has followed a similar path.
In 1901, Karl Landsteiner (1868–1943) discovered that human blood could be grouped, and he devised the ABO blood group system that we still use today. In 1915, Leone Lattes (1887–1954) used Landsteiner’s discovery to develop a simple method for determining the ABO blood group of a dried bloodstain and immediately began to apply his test in criminal investigations. As we will see in Chapter Nine, ABO typing is currently used to identify suspects and exonerate the innocent as well as in paternity testing and crime scene reconstruction.
The history of forensic science is replete with similar examples. Early in the twentieth century, Calvin Goddard (1891–1955) perfected a system for comparing bullets under a comparison microscope in order to determine if they came from the same weapon. This technique remains the mainstay of current firearms examination. Albert Osborn (1858–1946) laid down the principles of document examination in his book Questioned Documents (1910). Many of these are still used by modern document examiners.
THE FIRST FORENSIC SCIENTISTS 
Interestingly, the first forensic scientists came not from the world of science but from the world of fiction. Not only does art imitate life, but also life imitates art.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes frequently uses the sciences of fingerprinting, document examination, and blood analysis to solve the crimes presented to him. In fact, in the very first Sherlock Holmes novel, A Study in Scarlet (1887), Holmes develops a chemical to determine whether a stain was blood. Since this technique had not been previously used in a real-life criminal investigation, Holmes was definitely ahead of his time.
In Mark Twain’s Life on the Mississippi (1883), a thumbprint is used to identify a murderer, and in Twain’s The Tragedy of Pudd’nhead Wilson (1893–1894), a fingerprint pops up in a court trial. These examples pre-dated the groundbreaking work on fingerprints by Sir Francis Galton (1822–1911) in the 1890s, for which he received knighthood.
Many believe that the first real-life forensic scientist was Hans Gross (1847–1915). His reasoned and methodic approach to criminal investigation and the mind of not only criminals, but also their pursuers, laid the foundation for modern criminology.
In 1893, he published the first treatise on the use of scientific knowledge and procedures in criminal investigations. His classic 1898 work Criminal Psychology laid out the principles of criminal behavior and how evidence should be evaluated and used in criminal proceedings. Interestingly, he also used the more modern term criminalist to refer to those involved in criminal investigation.
Others soon followed in Gross’s footsteps, most notably Edmund Locard (1877–1966), a police officer and professor in Lyon, France. In the early 1900s, he voiced an extremely important observation that became known as Locard’s Exchange Principle, which remains the cornerstone of modern forensic investigation.
THE LOCARD EXCHANGE PRINCIPLE 
Wherever he steps, whatever he touches, whatever he leaves, even unconsciously, will serve as a silent witness against him. Not only his fingerprints or his footprints, but his hair, the fibers from his clothes, the glass he breaks, the tool mark he leaves, the paint he scratches, the blood or semen he deposits or collects.
All of these and more, bear mute witness against him. This is evidence that does not forget. It is not confused by the excitement of the moment. It is not absent because human witnesses are. It is factual evidence. Physical evidence cannot be wrong, it cannot perjure itself, it cannot be wholly absent. Only human failure to find it, study and understand it, can diminish its value.
—Edmund Locard 
An understanding of the Locard Exchange Principle is critical to grasping the true workings of forensic science. As so elegantly stated by Professor Locard, the basic premise is that whenever a person comes into contact with another person, object, or place, an exchange of materials takes place. Blood, fibers, hair, or any other substance is either left behind or picked up and carried away by the individual. If you own a pet, this exchange of materials is well known to you. Look at your clothes and you’ll likely see cat or dog hair clinging to the fabric. You may also find that you have transferred these hairs to your car, your office, and any other place you frequent.
The placing of a suspect at the scene of a crime is one of the basic functions of forensic science. The analysis of evidence is to create an association or link between the perpetrator and the crime. In some cases, the mere fact that the suspect was at the scene is an indication of guilt. A fingerprint on the faceplate of a cracked bank vault, semen obtained from a rape victim, or paint from the fender of a car involved in a hit-and-run would place the suspect at a scene where he perhaps had no “innocent” reason to be.
This linkage of evidence is the heart and soul of forensic science. It proves that a person has come into contact with another person, place, or object. Or perhaps it proves that two objects or substances share a common source. For example, if a chip of car paint found in the clothing of a child victim of a hit-and-run is matched to a particular car, this match shows that the car was the source of the paint. Or if blood found at a crime scene matches the DNA profile of blood obtained from a suspect, it proves the blood shared a common source, namely the suspect. Does this make either suspect guilty? Not necessarily. That determination is made in a court of law. The linkage of the evidence simply puts the suspect at the scene. It is up to the police and prosecutors to prove that this linkage is proof of guilt. Or conversely, for the suspect and his attorney to offer an innocent reason for the evidence to be found where it was.
Let’s look at another example. A woman is found raped and murdered in her home. DNA from semen found at the scene is matched to the man who lives next door. Doesn’t look good for him. But, what if the two were having a clandestine affair? What if he had visited her an hour or so before her murder? Things aren’t as clear, are they? The one thing he can’t deny is that it was his DNA that was found at the scene. But, he may have another reason for it to be there. So, forensic science can link him to the scene but it cannot always reveal why he was there and what transpired while he was there.
GENERAL ORGANIZATION OF FORENSIC SCIENCE 
This book will not deal with the techniques of law enforcement and investigation but rather will look into the functions of the criminalists, the crime lab, and the medical examiner. This is still a huge undertaking, and as we go along you will see that the domain of forensic science involves many scientific disciplines. It is organized in many different ways.
As I said earlier, the development of modern forensic science paralleled advances in science, particularly the physical and biological sciences. The invention of the microscope, the development of photography, the understanding of the physics of ballistic trajectories, and the discovery of blood typing and DNA analysis are examples of such advances. Before these scientific principles and procedures were applied to criminal investigations, they underwent many years of refinement. Some moved quickly, others at a snail’s pace, so the various areas of science entered the forensics arena in a more or less haphazard fashion.
It should come as no surprise that the organization of these various techniques into a coherent field of study was neither smooth nor linear, and the use of them in criminal investigation varied greatly from country to country and even from area to area within the United States. This is still true today. Some jurisdictions have complete and sophisticated crime labs, while others are rudimentary by comparison.
For the fiction writer, this is a gold mine of opportunity. The popular horror writer John Saul once said that he set his stories in small towns “because the cops are stupid.” What he meant is that if your story is in a rural area, the local police are neither equipped for nor experienced in the handling of major crimes. In a city like Los Angeles, the police, the crime lab, and the coroner’s office employs hundreds, even thousands, of people and have a budget, though still woefully inadequate, in the millions. A small town in the rural South may have the police chief, a single deputy, and the local undertaker as the sum total of their forensic team. Sort of like Mayberry with Andy and Barney and Floyd the barber as the coroner. Rich soil for a fiction writer.
Regardless of the level of sophistication in a given jurisdiction, modern forensics integrates the varied scientific disciplines in an effort to solve crimes. This requires extensive coordination among law enforcement, the crime scene technicians, the crime lab, and the medical examiner.
Crime labs have been around for many decades. August Vollmer (1876– 1955) used forensics as a police chief in Berkeley, California, and in 1923 he established the first forensic laboratory in the United States when he was chief in Los Angeles. The famous 1929 St. Valentine’s Day Massacre (see Chapter Sixteen: Firearms Examination) prompted two Chicago businessmen to help establish the Scientific Crime Detection Laboratory (SCDL), the first independent crime lab, at Northwestern University. In 1932, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) established a national forensics laboratory, that offered services to law enforcement across the country. It served as the model for all future state and local labs. Now many states have networks of regional and local labs that support law enforcement at all levels.
The scientific services offered by the modern crime lab and medical examiner’s office are varied and complex. In reality, the number of services supplied by a particular laboratory depends on its size and budget. State and regional labs may provide a wide array of services while local labs may only provide basic testing. The smaller labs typically outsource more sophisticated testing to the larger regional labs. In addition, the FBI’s National Crime Lab offers services to law enforcement throughout the country. Not only does the FBI lab perform virtually every type of test, it possesses or has access to databases on everything from fingerprints to tire track impressions to postage stamps.
At the more local level, larger labs may have separate departments for each discipline, while smaller labs tend to combine services. For example, a large state lab may have separate firearms, tool marks, serology (blood examination), and DNA units, while a local lab may combine firearms with tool marks and DNA with serology. In very small labs, a single technician may do all the work. Obviously, in this circumstance, a great deal of the work must be sent to larger reference labs.
You’ve no doubt heard of CSI. It stands for Crime Scene Investigation. Larger crime labs may have a special Crime Scene Investigation Unit (CSIU), which consists of individuals trained in evidence recognition, collection, and preservation. They are also skilled in performing many of the “field tests” and screening tests that must be done at a crime scene. Many of these technicians also perform laboratory testing once the crime scene samples are returned to the lab. Smaller jurisdictions do not have a specialized CSIU so the collection of evidence falls to the local police or sheriff.
Two other terms warrant attention because they can create confusion. A criminalist is a forensic scientist. Criminalistics is synonymous with forensic science. Using either of these terms is correct. Because of the wide range and sophistication of the many scientific disciplines represented in the modern crime lab, many criminalists specialize in a single area of forensic science. They may work in toxicology (drugs and poisons), serology (blood), fingerprint analysis, chemistry, firearms and ballistics, or one of the many other service areas of the crime lab.
CRIME LAB SERVICES  
In general, the forensic science services offered by the coroner or medical examiner’s office and the crime lab can be divided into biological science and physical science arenas. Each of these areas will be covered in considerable detail in later chapters.
BIOLOGICAL FORENSIC SCIENCE SERVICES 
BOTANY: The examination of plant residue by a forensic botanist may be crucial to solving a crime. Plant fragments, seeds, pollen, and soil may place a suspect at the crime. For example, if pollen found on the clothing of a suspect is matched to that of a rural crime scene, it would suggest that the suspect had been in the same area. As with insects, plant and pollen evidence may reveal that a corpse has been moved.
FORENSIC ANTHROPOLOGY: The forensic anthropologist is primarily concerned with the identification of human skeletal remains and is often asked to determine the age, sex, and race of the person, identify any illnesses or injuries the person may have suffered, and establish the time, cause, and manner of death as best he can. Other duties might be to identify victims of mass disasters or those interred in mass graves.
FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY: Entomology is the study of insects. The forensic entomologist uses his knowledge of the life cycles of flies and various other insects that feed on corpses to determine the approximate time of death. He may also use his knowledge of insect habitats to determine if a body has been moved from one location to another.
FORENSIC ODONTOLOGY: This is forensic dentistry. The forensic dentist helps identify unknown corpses by matching dental patterns with previous X-rays, dental casts, or photographs. Since tooth enamel is the hardest substance in the human body and often survives when nothing else of the deceased remains, the forensic dentist may help with identifying homicide victims, victims of mass disasters, and skeletal remains. He may also be called upon to match a suspect’s teeth with bite marks on the victim or on food products, such as cheese or apples, that the perpetrator may have left at the scene.
FORENSIC PATHOLOGY: This is the domain of the forensic pathologist, who is a medical doctor with subspecialty training in pathology and further training in forensic pathology. The medical examiner is usually a forensic pathologist and is called upon to answer many crucial questions. Who is the victim? How did he die? What injuries did he suffer and when and how were they inflicted? The forensic pathologist uses the autopsy, police reports, medical records, suspect and witness interviews, and the results of crime lab evidence evaluations in pursuit of the answers.
The coroner or medical examiner is ultimately responsible for signing death certificates and is charged with determining the time, cause, and manner of death. Many natural and virtually all accidental, suicidal, and homicidal deaths come to his attention. In cases of suspected medical malpractice, his findings as to the cause of injury or death may be crucial to the case’s eventual outcome. He may also examine living victims to determine the cause and age of injuries, particularly in cases or assault, rape, or abuse.
FORENSIC PSYCHIATRY: The forensic psychiatrist is often involved in both criminal and civil proceedings, where the state of mind of the perpetrator is important in not only guilt and innocence but also in sentencing. He might be asked to address someone’s sanity or competence to stand trial, sign documents, or give informed medical consent. In suicide cases, he may be asked to do a “psychological autopsy” in order to determine possible motivations.
SEROLOGY: The serology department deals with blood and other body fluids such as saliva and semen. Blood typing, paternity testing, and DNA profiling are conducted by the serologist.
TOXICOLOGY: Toxicology is the study of drugs and poisons. The forensic toxicologist is called upon to determine if drugs or poisons are present in both the living and the deceased and perhaps to assess their contribution to the person’s aberrant behavior or death. He might be asked to identify confiscated drugs, or to determine if a driver was intoxicated or if a worker has violated company drug use policies.
PHYSICAL FORENSIC SCIENCE SERVICES 
DOCUMENT EXAMINATION: Questioned documents are those whose age or authenticity is in doubt. This includes any document that may have been altered. The document examiner uses handwriting analysis to match known exemplars to questioned documents or signatures. He might be asked to analyze the physical and chemical properties of paper and ink as well as expose indented (second-page) writing. Typewritten or photocopied documents that have been altered also fall under the document examiner’s area of expertise.
FINGERPRINT EXAMINATION: Fingerprint examiners are charged with matching finger, palm, and foot sole prints. The comparison of a crime scene print may be carried out against a database or a suspect’s prints.
FIREARMS EXAMINATION: Firearms examination, commonly but erroneously referred to as ballistics, deals with the examination of weapons, ammunition, fired bullets, shell casings, and shotgun shells. Firearms experts employ the microscope and various chemical analyses in an attempt to identify the weapon type and to match any fired bullets or shell casings to a suspect weapon.
OTHER PATTERNED EVIDENCE: Patterned evidence is evidence that forms a recognizable pattern that can be compared to other patterns. Fingerprints are an example of this type of evidence as are tire and shoe tracks and tool marks.
TRACE EVIDENCE: Examples of trace evidence (any small item of evidence) include hair, fiber, paint, glass, and soil. This evidence may place the suspect at the crime scene or in contact with the victim.
OTHER FORENSIC SCIENCE SERVICES 
EVIDENCE COLLECTION UNIT: This unit is also called the Crime Scene Investigation Unit (CSIU) in many jurisdictions. Members of this team are charged with collecting and preserving evidence from the crime scene and transporting it to the lab. Their duties include exposing and lifting latent fingerprints, collecting hair and fibers, and gathering any other articles of evidence at the scene.
EVIDENCE STORAGE: A secure place for storing and preserving evidence is essential. Often materials must be kept for years, even decades, and the chain of custody must remain unbroken throughout or the evidence could be compromised and lose its evidentiary value. Only authorized individuals can examine the evidence and they must sign it in and out and account for it at all times. If the firearms lab needs to check a bullet that is being held in evidence against a suspect bullet, the examiner must take possession of the bullet, signing for its release, and maintain possession until he signs it back into the secure evidence lockup. This is true whether the crime is one day or one decade old.
PHOTOGRAPHY UNIT: This unit photographically records the scene, all evidence, and the body (if one is present). These photos or videos are crucial to crime scene reconstruction and the presentation of evidence in the courtroom.
THE CORONER AND THE MEDICAL EXAMINER 
You probably noticed that I’ve used the terms coroner and medical examiner (ME) almost interchangeably even though they are often quite different, as you will see. The reason is that whether the person in charge of “all things death” is a coroner or a medical examiner depends upon which system is in place in the particular jurisdiction under discussion. Since this book is designed to give general information that you can use to craft your story in any area, either term could be used. So, I use them interchangeably for the purpose of discussion. If you set your story in a real location, check to see which system is used in that area and then use the proper designation. If your locale is fictional, you can use either term so long as you are consistent.
The term coroner comes from the English office of the “crowner of the king” or the “keeper of the pleas of the Crown.” It is unclear exactly when the office of coroner came into existence, but it was used prior to the Norman Invasion (1066) and may have been as early as 871 A.D., during the reign of Alfred the Great. King Richard Plantagenet (1157–1199), also known as Richard the Lionheart, officially created the position in 1194. Then, in 1276, the legal document known as De officio coronatoris set out the coroner’s duties and obligations. This was later replaced and refined by the Coroners Act 1887.
As early as the eleventh century, the crowner performed many judicial functions, including the determination of the cause of death, and even served as a judge in criminal proceedings. In this latter duty, he was an inquisitional judge in that he actually investigated crimes rather than merely tried a case based on evidence brought to his court. That is, he actively pursued evidence and criminals. Such inquisitional judges evolved from ancient Roman law, which is the basis for systems found in Russia, Spain, and France.
But under English law, courtroom judges are non-inquisitional. They are not actively involved in the criminal investigation and do not participate in the evidence gathering. Rather, they hear the evidence provided by others and oversee the proceedings within the courtroom.
The English coroner is an exception to this rule and carries out his duties in a more inquisitional manner. That is, he is an inquisitional judge in a non-inquisitional system. Early English settlers to the New World brought with them the office of the coroner in the 1600s so that the United States has a similar inquisitional coroner system.
The medical examiner (ME), a more modern invention, traces its origins to France and Scotland and was brought to the United States in the late 1800s. By definition, the ME is a medical professional with at least an M.D. degree. Most modern MEs are trained in pathology, particularly forensic pathology. This means that, ideally, an ME is a medical doctor with specialty training in pathology, and experience and training in the field of forensic pathology.
Two types of forensic investigative systems exist in the United States. The coroner system is older and in many ways inferior to the more modern medical examiner system. Fortunately, the trend in the United States is toward the latter system.
In England, for centuries, the king appointed the coroner. In the United States, since there was no king, the coroner became an appointed or elected position. What qualifications were needed to run for coroner? Basically, none. At least no special medical or forensic skills were required. The sole criterion was the ability to win an election or to secure an appointment from the county commission or whatever legal body was charged with this appointment. It was, and still is, often more a popularity contest.
The coroner might be the sheriff, newspaper publisher, neighborhood café owner, or local funeral director. As often as not, he possessed little or no medical training or experience. Over the past several decades, this has evolved so that today many jurisdictions require that the coroner be a licensed physician. He may be an internist, an obstetrician, or a dermatologist, but he does not necessarily have to be a pathologist and certainly not a forensic pathologist. Thus, the coroner may not actually be qualified to perform many of his duties. This deficiency led to the creation of the medical examiner system.
In 1877, Massachusetts passed a law that replaced coroners with MEs and required that these MEs be licensed physicians. New York City adopted a similar system in 1915. In the 1940s, Congress established the Commission on Uniform State Laws. One of the laws that came from this commission was the Medical Examiner’s Act, which was adopted by most states. This led to the replacement of most coroners with MEs. However, with the exception of the District of Columbia, no program existed for investigating deaths in cases under federal jurisdiction until 1990 when Congress established the Armed Forces Medical Examiner’s Office in the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology.
Most medical examiner systems require the ME be a pathologist, while some require that he be trained in forensic pathology. There is a difference. As we saw earlier, most clinical pathologists work in hospitals, where they oversee the hospital laboratory and perform medical autopsies. A medical autopsy is designed to search for diseases and natural causes of death. On the other hand, a forensic pathologist is a clinical pathologist who has taken extra training in the field of forensics. He oversees all aspects of death and criminal injury, perhaps including the crime lab, and performs forensic autopsies. These are designed to help determine the cause and manner of death.
In an ideal world, every jurisdiction would have an ME who is a forensic pathologist. He would be qualified to fulfill all the duties of the office. Yet, even today, in many areas, the coroner system thrives and the non-medically trained coroner continues to be the officer charged with investigating death. This is a practical solution because these areas simply may not have the population base to justify having a forensic pathologist as ME.
In these circumstances, the coroner has several alternatives for acquiring the needed specialized pathological services. He might contract with a larger regional or state ME’s office for pathological and laboratory testing. Or, he might hire a forensic pathologist to serve as ME. This pathologist may be given a title such as Deputy Assistant Coroner. Under the legal umbrella of the coroner’s office, he would perform autopsies, testify in court, and perhaps oversee the crime lab.
The relationship of the medical examiner to the crime lab varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. In some areas the ME oversees the forensic laboratory. In other areas the lab may be under the auspices of law enforcement agencies such as the police or sheriff’s department. And as with pathological services, many rural jurisdictions obtain lab services through contracts with major city or state crime labs.
DUTIES OF THE CORONER OR MEDICAL EXAMINER 
The coroner or ME wears many hats. Judge, juror, investigator, and scientist are some of the roles he may fill within the medico-legal investigations system. In short, his responsibilities cover every aspect of death investigation and include:
• determination of the cause and manner of death 
• determination of the time of death 
• supervision of evidence collection from the body 
• identification of unknown corpses and skeletal remains 
• determination of any contributory factors in the death 
• certification of the death certificate 
• presentation of expert testimony in court 
• oversight of the crime lab (in some areas) 
• examination of injuries to the living and determination of their cause and timing 
In fulfilling these duties, he uses all available information. Reviewing witness statements, visiting crime scenes, examining collected evidence and the results of crime lab testing, and performing autopsies are part of this endeavor. In addition, he typically has subpoena power to gather whatever evidence he deems necessary and to interrogate witnesses. He often works with the police and homicide detectives to help guide their ongoing investigations by supplying them with the results of any forensic tests he or the crime lab has performed.
THE MEDICAL EXAMINER IN THE COURTROOM  
Many of the ME’s most important duties take place in the courtroom, for it is in this arena that the world of science is brought to the law. His testimony may make or break a case. In fact, his determination of the cause and manner of death (see Chapter Six) will determine if a case comes to court in the first place. If he states that the manner of death is natural or suicidal, it would not likely become a court case. But, if the death is homicidal or accidental (such as in an industrial setting), the case may very well enter the courtroom. The ME might be called to testify by either the prosecution or the defense and may also face experts with different opinions. His sworn duty is to present the facts and offer an unbiased opinion based on these facts.
He might be asked to discuss and explain the forensic evidence and to offer his expert opinion regarding the evidence to the judge and jury. In this regard he acts as an educator as well as a scientist. Often he is the only person the jury hears from who makes complex scientific information understandable. At other times he must pit his knowledge and communication skills against experts with different opinions.
Our court system is adversarial in nature. This means that each side attempts to outfox or out-argue the other. Each attempts to present evidence that favors their side and “spin” any contrary evidence in a manner that supports their theory of the case. This locking of horns can put the forensic expert in a difficult position. Each side is likely to bring in experts to support or refute the testimony of the ME. These experts may be other forensic pathologists, toxicologists, firearms experts, or someone from any of the other forensic areas.
Each expert should expect to be qualified before the jury. The attorneys will ask questions about his credentials, training, experience, areas of expertise, teaching positions, publications in the field in question, and anything else they deem will support or undermine his true expertise. The side that called him will ask easy, supportive questions, while the other side will ask tougher questions to impeach any testimony he may give. The expert must be prepared for potentially unsettling questions.
The testimony of the expert should be honest and measured. He should avoid over-selling his beliefs, while at the same time making his honest opinions clear and believable. That is, he should be neither too sure nor too unsure of his opinion. The former might alienate the jury while the latter might undermine his credibility.
Depending on his own abilities and knowledge, and depending on the number and types of experts arrayed against or in support of him, the ME may present all the evidence himself or he may ask that members of his staff or the crime lab to present portions of the evidence. For example, the ME may give testimony regarding the autopsy, while a fingerprint expert presents and discusses the prints found and how they were matched. A toxicologist may present the results of the toxicological examinations. A firearms expert might show photos of the two bullets he matched.
It is important for the expert witness to understand that, unlike in his scientific endeavors, the real goal of court proceedings is not to uncover the absolute truth. Rather it is to provide enough evidence so that the jury can come to some understandable version of the truth based on the applicable rules of law. Certain evidentiary items may not be admissible. They might have been improperly obtained or contaminated by mishandling, or they might be deemed overly inflammatory or prejudicial.
So, if some evidence is excluded, how can the absolute truth be found? Isn’t that like attempting to solve a math problem with only half the numbers? Mostly, but the expert can’t change the law and must work within its confines. He can only present the information he is allowed to present, explain it as fully as he can, and offer his true and unbiased opinion. This will help the jury get as close to the truth as possible.
With expert testimony, the judge typically allows a great deal of leeway in regards to how the information is presented to the jury. Most witnesses are allowed only to answer questions. If they attempt to move too far afield of the question, the opposing attorney will object or the judge himself may rein them in. An expert is allowed to speak more broadly and to teach the jury. The reason for this departure from the normal Q&A method of evidence presentation is that the expert is there for the stated purpose of presenting and explaining any evidence in his area of expertise. Indeed, he is there to teach the judge and jury. For example, it would be very difficult for the average juror to understand the impact of DNA evidence simply from a series of yes and no questions. Allowing the expert to explain what DNA is, how it is tested for, and what the results of the testing means gives the jury the knowledge they need to understand and evaluate the evidence.
In presenting the results of forensic testing, it is rare that an expert is permitted to say that something absolutely, without doubt, matches. Rather he will use phrases such as “similar to,” “consistent with,” “not dissimilar from,” “compatible with,” or “shares many characteristics with.” Each if these terms speaks to the fact that forensic evidence is rarely, if ever, absolute; rather it states probabilities. For example, no two people have the same DNA, but the testifying expert will not say that the DNA “absolutely matches” that of the defendant. Instead he will say that the probability that it matches is a billion to one. That is almost, but not quite, absolute.
Why is this? Because science is not absolute. It is not static, with the possible exception of mathematics, and even this is subject to debate. Science is built on theories. As scientists attempt to explain why things are as they are, they will develop a theory that explains the given phenomenon and test it. If the theory stands up to the testing process, it becomes an accepted theory. If not, it is altered and retested. As soon as the theory survives rigorous testing, it becomes an accepted theory, or what we might view as the truth. But later, other evidence might come to light that alters the theory yet again. Does this mean that the original “truth” was not true and that the new “truth” is? No, it means that the new theory, as was the old one, is true most of the time. How often does it hold true? It depends on the theory and the results of the testing. The probability that the theory holds true could be 50 percent (coin toss), 90 percent (probable), 99.999 percent (highly probable), or 50 million to 1 (virtually 100 percent probable). As with other branches of science, forensic science deals with probabilities, not absolutes.
EVIDENCE STANDARDS OF ACCEPTANCE 
Regardless of who presents the information, how do the judge and jury know that the science behind the presented evidence is real and not junk science? How do they know that the theory or testing procedure has been properly confirmed and that the probabilities cited are real? What’s to keep someone from getting on the stand and spouting personal beliefs, which may have no scientific backing? The current standards for accepting evidence in the courtroom resulted from these two landmark cases.
Frye v. United States 
In 1923, the District of Columbia Circuit Court addressed the admissibility of polygraph (lie detector) evidence in the case of Frye v. United States. This landmark decision set the rules, now known as the Frye Standard, for the presentation of scientific evidence before the court. This standard states that the court will accept expert testimony on “well-recognized scientific principle and discovery” if it has been “sufficiently established” and has achieved “general acceptance” in the scientific community. This allows for new scientific tests to be presented, but only after they have been thoroughly hashed out and accepted by the scientific community.
Frye became the standard for many years and is still followed in many jurisdictions, but more recently it has been replaced by Daubert, or Rule 702.
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals 
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence stated that the “trier of fact,” which means the judge, may use expert testimony to “understand the evidence” and to “determine a fact in issue” at his discretion. This was upheld and amplified in 1993 by the United States Supreme Court, which said that the “general acceptance” clause in Frye was not absolute and handed the judge wider discretion as to what expert testimony he would allow in his court in any given case. To help judges in this regard, the court offered several guidelines.
For a new scientific technique or theory to be acceptable to the court it must:
• be subject to testing and to peer review 
• be standardized with recognized maintenance of such standards 
• have a known and accepted error rate 
• attain widespread acceptance  
This basically means that the technique or theory must be spelled out, tested, reviewed, accepted, and continually monitored for accuracy.
The admissibility of scientific evidence and testimony is often hammered out in pretrial hearings and motions, which occur away from the jury. If in the eyes of the judge the evidence to be presented by the expert passes the Frye or Daubert standards, he will allow it before the jury. If not, he might exclude it from the trial. 
