---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_023.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["print", "fingerprint", "pattern", "system", "finger", "loop", "whorl", "latent", "two", "used", "match", "use", "ridge", "left", "one", "see", "first", "right", "criminal", "crime", "scene", "powder", "file", "glove", "police"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit023html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 12 
FINGERPRINTS: 
A HANDY IDENTIFICATION TOOL  
Fingerprints are extremely powerful tools in criminal investigations. They are often the only way police can identify criminals and solve crimes, some of which are decades old. Though a well-accepted standard now, the recognition of the individuality of fingerprints by police, scientists, and the courts did not happen overnight.
If you look closely at your finger pads (the fleshy surface you use for touching and gripping), you will see very fine lines that curve and circle and arch. These lines are composed of narrow valleys called grooves and hills known as friction ridges. When you see an inked fingerprint, you are looking at the pattern of the friction ridges.
These ridges have a practical purpose. They give your fingers traction and allow you to pick up a glass, a pin, a piece of paper, or a speck of lint. Over the centuries, we learned that these ridges also serve as a unique “signature” for each of us. And as the population of communities grew, this became increasingly important.
When the world was poorly populated and people existed in small nomadic communities of thirty to fifty individuals, everyone knew everyone else. But, as populations grew, settled into ever-expanding cities, and developed systems of government, identifying others became much more difficult.
This fueled a search for a reliable method for identifying people. Most people could not read, write, or sign their name, and this made proving identity for legal matters very difficult.
The two most important characteristics of any method of identification are that it be absolutely individual and that it remains unchanged throughout the person’s life. It is also important that it be easily obtained and, for criminal investigations, be frequently left behind at a crime scene. Fingerprints fit these requirements perfectly. But it took several centuries and the astute observations of many scientists and criminal investigators before this tool became an accepted standard.
THE HISTORY OF FINGERPRINTS  
The evolution of fingerprints as a method of absolute identity was a long, slow process journey of nearly three thousand years. Let’s look at some of the milestones in this development.
PREHISTORY: Early pot makers “signed” their works with an impressed finger or thumbprint, which identified the work as their own.
1000 B.C.: Chinese used fingerprints to “sign” legal documents and even criminal confessions. It is unclear whether this was a ceremonial practice or a true method of personal identity.
CA. 1000 A.D.: Quintilian, a Roman attorney, exonerated a blind man accused of murdering his own mother by showing that a bloody palm print found at the scene had been placed by someone else in an attempt to frame the unfortunate man.
1685: Marcello Malpighi (1628–1694), professor of anatomy at the University of Bologna, was the first to recognize fingerprint patterns when he wrote of the “varying ridges and patterns” he saw on human fingertips. He was the first to use the terms loops and whorls in describing these patterns.
1823: Johannes Purkinje (1787–1869) of the University of Breslau devised the first system for classifying fingerprints. He listed nine basic patterns and laid down rules for their individual classification. These rules and patterns are the basis for today’s classification systems.
1858: In order to prevent fraud in contracts and pension distributions, Sir William Herschel (1833–1917), an English civil servant stationed in Bengal, India, required that the natives sign contracts with a hand imprint. He is perhaps the first European to recognize the individuality of such prints. He also kept a record of his own prints and showed that they did not change over a fifty-year period, a discovery that was of paramount importance to the development of fingerprints as a forensic tool.
1880: Henry Faulds (1843–1930), a physician and surgeon at Tsukiji Hospital in Tokyo, Japan, wrote that fingerprinting could be used for personal identification and suggested that it might be useful for identifying criminals. He also recognized that latent (invisible) prints could be exposed by dusting them with powder and used this method to exonerate a man accused of thievery. The man’s prints were checked against one the thief had left on a window, but they didn’t match. Days later the real thief was found, his prints matched, and he confessed.
1883: Mark Twain (1835–1910) understood the discriminatory power of finger-prints and used the technique in his book Life on the Mississippi, and again later in The Tragedy of Pudd’nhead Wilson (1893–1894).
1892: Sir Francis Galton (1822–1911) published his classic textbook, Finger Prints, the first book on the subject. He described three patterns within the prints that he called loops, arches, and whorls. More importantly, he gave convincing evidence that no two prints were identical.
1892: Argentina became the first country to use fingerprints to solve a crime. In June 1892, Francisca Rojas murdered her two sons and cut her own throat. The investigation centered on a man named Pedro Ramón Velázquez, but Juan Vucetich (1858–1925), a police official in Argentina, became convinced that fingerprints could be used to identify criminals and devised a classification system that is still in use in most of South America. Vucetich matched a bloody fingerprint found at the scene to Rojas’ right thumb and she confessed.
1897: Herman Welcker (1822–1899) compared his own prints taken in 1897 with ones he had taken forty-one years earlier in 1856 and found they were unchanged, thus supporting the findings of Sir William Herschel.
1899: Sir Edward Richard Henry (1850–1931) devised a classification system based on five types of prints. His system is the basis for those used in Britain and America today. Henry was appointed head of Scotland Yard in 1901 and adopted a fingerprint identification system in place of anthropometry.
1902: Burglar Harry Jackson became the first person in England to be convicted by fingerprint evidence when he left his thumbprint at the scene of his crime.
1903: The New York State Prison system instituted the first systematic use of fingerprints for criminal identification in the United States.
1910: Thomas Jennings became the first U.S. citizen convicted of a crime by use of fingerprints. Tried for murder in Chicago, Jennings was convicted and the verdict was upheld on appeal, making his case a landmark in the use of fingerprint evidence in court.
Near the end of the nineteenth century, fingerprints weren’t the only identification method being studied. In fact, the field of anthropometry vied with fingerprints to become the standard method for identification. Until an odd and landmark confrontation between the two methods settled the issue, that is.
ANTHROPOMETRY AND BERTILLONAGE  
Anthropometry (anthrop means “human”; metry means “to measure”) is defined as the study of human body measurements for use in anthropological classification and comparison. Simply put, it is the making of body measurements in order to compare individuals with each other.
Using anthropometry, French police officer Alphonse Bertillon (1853–1914) developed the first truly organized system for identifying individuals in 1882. Believing that the human skeleton did not change in size from about age twenty until death and that each person’s measurements were unique, he created a system of body measurements that became known as bertillonage. According to Bertillon, the odds of two people having the same bertillonage measurements were 286 million to one.
This belief led Bertillon to state that all people could be distinguished from one another by key measurements, such as height, seated height from head to seat, length and width of the head, right ear length, left little finger length, and width of the cheeks, among others. His greatest triumph came in February 1883, when he measured a thief named Dupont and compared his profile against his files of known criminals. He found that Dupont’s measurements matched a man named Martin. Dupont ultimately confessed that he was indeed Martin.
For many years, this system was accepted by many jurisdictions, but by the dawn of the twentieth century cracks began to appear. The measurements were inexact and subject to variation, depending upon who made them. And because the measurements in two people who were of the same size, weight, and body type varied by fractions of a centimeter, flaws quickly appeared and the system was soon discontinued. Its death knell tolled with the famous Will West case.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE WILL WEST CASE 
Though landmark in its importance, this case was an odd comical coincidence. On May 1, 1903, Will West came to Leavenworth Penitentiary in Kansas. The records clerk apparently thought that the man looked familiar, but the new inmate denied ever having been in the prison before. As part of his intake examination, anthropometry was performed and officials were surprised to find that Will’s measurements exactly matched those of William West, another inmate at Leavenworth. The two men even looked eerily similar as if they were twins.
They were brought together into the same room, but each stated that they were not brothers. Fingerprints were then used to distinguish between the two Wills after which Leavenworth immediately dumped anthropometry and switched to a fingerprint-based system for identifying prisoners. New York’s Sing Sing prison followed a month later.
But was the similarity between Will and William West just a bizarre coincidence? Not really. A report in the Journal of Police Science and Administration in 1980 revealed that the two actually were identical twins. They possessed many fingerprint similarities, nearly identical ear configurations (unusual in any circumstance except with identical twins), and each of the men wrote letters to the same brother, same five sisters, and same Uncle George. So, even though the brothers denied it, it seemed that they were related after all.
Bertillon reluctantly agreed to add fingerprints to his bertillonage profile. However, he only added those of the right hand, which proved to be a huge mistake.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE MONA LISA THEFT 
On August 21, 1911, the Mona Lisa was stolen from the Louvre Museum in Paris. The thief left a clear thumbprint on the glass that protected Leonardo Da Vinci’s masterpiece. To assist investigators, Alphonse Bertillon added his profiles to the investigation. Unfortunately, he had no classification system to streamline the search through his thousands of data cards, which resulted in he and his assistants spending several months digging through his files. They found no matches. Two years later, the police apprehended Vincenzo Perugia and his prints matched the one found at the crime scene.
It turned out that Perigia’s prints were among those in Bertillon’s possession all the time. Why no match? The print found at the scene was from Perugia’s left thumb, while Bertillon’s files only contained that of the right. This unmasked yet another flaw in Bertillon’s anthropometric system and finally put it to rest once and for all.
RIDGE PATTERNS  
Fingerprints are more accurately termed friction ridge prints, since it is the ridge patterns that are the basis of printing and comparison. Their use for identification depends upon three principles:
INDIVIDUALITY: Fingerprints are individual and are not shared by any two people, including identical twins. Twins share the same DNA (see Chapter Ten: DNA) but not fingerprints.
STABILITY: A person’s fingerprints remain unchanged throughout life, a fact confirmed by the work of William Herschel and Herman Welcker. Fingerprints develop in utero (in the womb) and remain unchanged from birth to death. Unless the damage is deep within the tissues, if someone burns or shaves off the pads of his fingers, the prints will disappear for a while, but as the skin repairs itself and the wounds heal the print reappears.
Severe damage that involves the deeper layers of the skin may leave a permanent scar and keep the prints from reemerging. Nonetheless, completely obliterating a print is difficult, and any scars left behind by the attempt to do so will create new individual characteristics an examiner can use for making a match.
COMMON PATTERNS: Fingerprints have general patterns that allow for a systematic method of classification, reducing the number of records that must be searched when looking for a match.
Once it was proven that fingerprints were individual and remained unchanged for life, a system for effectively using this knowledge became imperative. With an ever-increasing population, matching print after print by hand would have severely limited its usefulness. Some system for narrowing the search had to be devised.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: JOHN DILLINGER 
John Dillinger was one of America’s most notorious criminals, once named Public Enemy No. 1. In an effort to evade the cops, he underwent facial plastic surgery and tried to remove his fingerprints with acid. After his betrayal by the famous “Lady in Red,” Dillinger was shot dead outside Chicago’s Biograph Theater. Prints taken at the morgue proved that the dead man was indeed Dillinger. The acid had damaged only a portion of his finger pads, leaving enough ridge detail for matching with his prints on file with the police.
FINGERPRINT CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS  
The purpose of any classification system is to add order to chaos by finding common traits among items. The same is true for fingerprint files. They are useful only if they can be stored in great numbers and can be quickly searched. The FBI has more than 200 million fingerprint files. Organizing the prints into groups makes the search for a match to an unknown print much easier.
BASIC PRINT PATTERNS 
Whorls, loops, and arches are still the basis for fingerprint identification and matching because, although everyone has them, how many and where they are located is unique. Not only do the patterns vary from person to person, but they vary from finger to finger in any given individual. We each have ten unique prints, one on each of our digits. Let’s look at each of these basic patterns.
Arches 
Arches are ridgelines that rise in the center to create a wave-like pattern. They are subgrouped into plain (see Figure 12-1) and tented (see Figure 12-2) varieties. Tented arches possess a sharper central rise than do plain arches. Only 5 percent of all pattern types are arches.
Figure 12-1: Plain arches have a low central rise. 
Figure 12-2: The tented arch rises more sharply than does a standard arch. 
Loops 
Loops have one or more ridges that double back on themselves to produce a loop pattern. Loops make up 60 percent of all patterns seen and come in many varieties, some single (see Figure 12-3) and some double (see Figure 12-4). Single loops are further divided into two types depending upon the direction the ridges flow in relation to the two bones of the forearm—the radius and the ulna: Radial loops flow downward and toward the radius or the thumb side; ulnar loops flow toward the ulna or little finger side.
Figure 12-3: A single loop occurs when one or more ridges double back on themselves. 
Figure 12-4: A double loop is two loops nested against one another. 
Whorls 
Whorls look like little whirlpools of ridgelines and comprise 35 percent of all patterns seen. They are subgrouped into: plain whorls, which are either concentric circles like a target (see Figure 12-5) or spirals (see Figure 12-6) like a wound spring; central pocket loop whorls that resemble a loop with a whorl at its end; double loop whorls comprised of two loops that collide to produce an S-shaped pattern; and accidental loop whorls, which are similar to central pocket loop whorls but with subtle differences.
Figure 12-5: Target whorls look like a bull’s-eye. 
Figure 12-6: Spiral whorls look like clock springs. 
THE HENRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM 
Sir Edward Richard Henry, an inspector general of the British police in India’s Bengal province, worked on a fingerprint classification system for many years and completed it in 1899. The Henry System, with a few modifications, is still used in the United States and Great Britain.
It is somewhat complicated and I won’t go into great detail, but a brief look is worthwhile. At its heart lies the presence or absence of whorl patterns on the various fingers as revealed by the ten-finger print set. Scores are assigned based on which fingers have whorls, with some fingers getting higher scores than others.
First, Henry paired the fingers in a numerator/denominator scheme as follows:
If a whorl pattern is seen on either of the first pair (right index and right thumb), it is assigned a value of 16 points, on the second pair (right ring and right middle) 8 points, the third 4 points, the fourth 2 points, and the fifth 0 points. Any finger having an arch or a loop pattern is given a value of 0. Finally, 1 is added to both the numerator and denominator.
Let’s say that a whorl appeared on both the right index finger and the right thumb. According to the scheme, each of these would receive 16 points and would be indicated by placing a 16 in both the numerator and denominator at the first position of the sequence. If neither had a whorl, both numerator and denominator would have a 0. Further, if a whorl appeared on the right thumb but not the right index, then the numerator would be assigned a 0 and the denominator a 16. In these situations, the first position in Henry’s chart would, respectively, look like this:
So, a set that showed whorls on only the right index and little fingers and the left middle and ring fingers would have a score of:
Using Henry’s scoring system, files are separated into 1,024 groups. Only those prints with the same overall score as the print in question need to be examined. This greatly focuses the search. The actual match is made by hand. That means that the system does not make the match; it simply reduces the number of files agents must wade through.
One major drawback to Henry’s system was that it required a complete ten-finger set of prints. Otherwise the overall score could not be calculated. But criminals rarely leave behind a full set of prints at a crime scene. This proved to be a major obstacle for law enforcement until computers and the Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS) hit the scene.
THE AUTOMATED FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM 
AFIS was established in 1977 through collaboration between the FBI and the National Bureau of Standards (now the National Institute of Standards and Technologies). With the growing numbers of print sets in the FBI’s database, some method for storing, retrieving, and matching became a necessity. Imagine hundreds of agents sitting at hundreds of desks looking through thousands of print cards, searching for a match to the partial print left behind by a serial killer. The wheels of justice would indeed move slowly.
The AFIS computer scans and digitally encodes fingerprints, storing this information in massive databases. It can then search thousands of these files each second and attempt to match them to an unknown ten-print set or even a single print.
Once the computer makes a match, an agent trained in fingerprint evaluation hand-checks the prints to see if they indeed match. Even in the computer age, the trained human eye makes the final match.
An example of the power of such rapid searches is illustrated by the famous Night Stalker case in California.
FORENSIC CASE FILE: THE NIGHT STALKER 
Between June 1984 and August 1985, a series of brutal rapes and murders occurred throughout Southern California and the Bay Area, putting the entire state on edge. The killer became known as the Night Stalker because he entered his victims’ homes at night through unlocked doors, often after he had cut the phone line. He shot any adult males present, then raped the female victims, often in the bed next to where the woman’s spouse lay dead or dying. Sometimes he then killed his female victim, and other times he did not. Survivors described him as a thin, foul-smelling Hispanic male with bad teeth.
His final victim was a Mission Viejo, California, woman whom he had raped in the bed next to her boyfriend who had been shot in the head. Both survived the attack. The woman saw her attacker leave in an orange Toyota station wagon and called 911.
Earlier, a teenager working on his motorcycle in his garage saw the station wagon enter and then leave the neighborhood. He wrote down the license plate number, and the next morning called police and gave it to them. The stolen car was found abandoned two days later, but a partial latent fingerprint was lifted from the vehicle.
The print was sent to Sacramento where it was entered into the newly installed AFIS system and within hours a match was made. It was estimated that to perform a by-hand match of the print against the 1.7 million print cards in the Los Angeles area alone would have taken an agent sixty-seven years.
The print revealed that the Night Stalker was Richard Ramirez, a twenty-five-year-old drifter from El Paso, Texas. Once his likeness went out over the media, residents of East Los Angeles recognized him and overpowered him as he attempted to steal another car. The police arrived in time to save him from an angry mob. On November 7, 1989, he received a death sentence.
As you can see, fingerprints have made great strides and sit beside DNA as the only two absolutely individualizing type of evidence. But to use them, they must be found.
LOCATING AND COLLECTING FINGERPRINTS  
Fingerprints are sometimes readily visible, while at other times they require a diligent search. A print left in grease, paint, or blood on a wall will be much easier to find than one left on a trash bag by a hand not contaminated with any visible substance. Yet, each can be critical to solving the crime.
Fingerprints are of three basic types:
Patent prints are visible to the naked eye. They occur when the perpetrator of the crime gets a substance such as blood, ink, paint, dirt, or grease on his fingers and leaves behind a visible print.
Plastic prints have a three-dimensional quality and occur when the perpetrator impresses a print into a soft substance such as wax, putty, caulk, soap, moist paint, and even cold butter.
Latent prints, by definition, are invisible and can’t be seen without special lighting or processing.
How do latent prints come about? The friction ridges on the inner surfaces of fingers, palms, and the soles of feet have tiny pores that are the outlet openings of sweat glands. Although these glands secrete sweat that is poor in oils, sweat glands in other areas of the body secrete a more oil-rich sweat. When fingers touch these areas or hair, they pick up oils, salts and grime. Other substances are collected from environmental surfaces you touch. A person deposits this residue whenever his finger pads contact another surface.
So, latent prints come from “dirty” fingers. Freshly washed hands will leave fainter latent prints than will fingers that are contaminated with sweat and grime. It is the job of the crime scene technicians and police to locate, expose, and collect these hidden prints.
The best surfaces to search for latent prints are the murder weapon, any tools or objects left behind by the criminal, opened drawers or out-of-place furniture, and entry and exit points. In short, any place the perpetrator may have touched.
Both patent and plastic prints are visible and can be easily photographed, and the photo can be used for matching. Often an angled light is used to increase contrast, but little else is needed to make these prints recordable. Latent prints require special handling and the criminalist has a toolbox full of methods for exposing and collecting them.
SIMPLE INSPECTION 
To reveal latent prints, the simple approach is often best. An angled light from a flashlight with or without the aid of a magnifying glass may bring it into focus. Also, because the oils of a latent print will fluoresce (glow) when exposed to some laser and ultraviolet lights, these light sources may snap it into view. Once revealed in this manner, it can be photographed.
Print Powders 
Fingerprint powders adhere to the moisture and oils of the latent print residue and expose the pattern of the friction ridges. The powders come in a variety of colors and types. The color chosen should impart the greatest degree of contrast with the background surface. Black (made from carbon black or charcoal) and gray (made from aluminum or titanium powder) are used most often, but white or another light color is used when the background is dark.
Magnetically sensitive powders may also be used; they, too, come in varying colors. These powders are used with a special magnetic “brush,” which is actually not a brush at all. It has no bristles and makes no actual contact with the print, which means it is less likely to damage or smear it. Passing the device over the print deposits the powder, and as with standard powder, the print snaps into view. Magnetic powders are better suited for slick surfaces such as shiny magazine covers, coated cardboard, and plastic bags or containers, where standard powders are less useful.
Other specialized powders are fluorescent. After these are applied, the print will fluoresce under a laser light.
Once the powdering process is complete, the print is photographed and then “lifted.” Lifting is done by gently laying the sticky surface of a strip of transparent tape over the print. The print pattern sticks to the tape, which is then peeled away and placed on a card for later examination and matching.
Latent prints on more porous surfaces must be treated with chemicals, which reveal print patterns by reacting with some component of the print residue. The reaction creates another compound that is more clearly visible. Common chemicals used for exposing prints include cyanoacrylate, iodine, ninhydrin, and silver nitrate.
Cyanoacrylate Vapor 
Cyanoacrylate is a component of Super Glue. In fact, Super Glue is 98 percent cyanoacrylate and it has become an extremely useful forensic tool. For use in exposing fingerprints, the glue must be heated and vaporized, but since it has such a low boiling temperature, little heat is required. The released vapors bind to the amino acids in print residues, revealing the latent print in white.
The item to be treated is often placed in a fuming chamber and exposed to the vapor. A fuming chamber is simply an airtight box that will prevent the gaseous glue from escaping. A few drops of the glue are put into a pan, which is placed over a heating element, and after a few minutes vapors fill the chamber and begin to react with the print.
The fumed print is quite hard and stable, as you might expect from Super Glue. It actually fixes the print to the surface it is on so that it can later be presented in court exactly as found. For example, if a print on a crowbar used in an assault is fumed with cyanoacrylate and stained, the crowbar itself can be collected and taken into court. The jury will not only see the print, but the location of the print on the weapon.
Once a print has been exposed with cyanoacrylate, it can be photographed as is or under an angled light. It can also be powdered just as other prints are and at times it can be treated with a fluorescent dye, which after binding to the print, glows under a laser or UV light. This, too, can be photographed.
Rather than setting up a fuming box at the crime scene, police now frequently use a handheld wand. This gadget heats a small cartridge of Super Glue mixed with a fluorescent dye. The wand releases fumes that are directed at the latent print. In this way, the cyanoacrylate “fixing” and the fluorescent dying of the print occur at the same time.
Iodine Fuming 
When heated in a fuming chamber, solid crystal iodine releases iodine vapors, which combine with the oils in the latent print to produce a brownish print. The print fades quickly, so it must be photographed right away. Or the print can be fixed by spraying it with a solution of starch in water. This solution will preserve the print for several weeks or months.
Ninhydrin 
Ninhydrin (triketohydrindene hydrate) has been a staple of law enforcement for many years and is fairly easy to use. The object that holds the latent print is dipped in or sprayed with a ninhydrin solution. The reaction of the ninhy-drin with the oils of the print produces a purple-blue print. One drawback is that this reaction is extremely slow, so the print may take several hours to appear. Heating the object to 80° to 100°F hastens the reaction.
Silver Nitrate 
Silver nitrate is a component of photographic film. When a latent print is exposed to silver nitrate, the chloride of the salt (sodium chloride) molecules in the print residue reacts with the silver to form silver chloride. This colorless compound “develops” when exposed to ultraviolet light, revealing a black or reddish brown print.
BLOODY PRINTS 
Latent or faint prints left by a blood-soaked finger can present special problems. They are often too faint to photograph and the usual powders may not expose them well enough. Sometimes, but not always, a laser light may cause the print to luminesce so it can be adequately photographed. When this isn’t possible or doesn’t work, luminol or Amido black might help.
Luminol 
Luminol was discussed in detail in Chapter Nine. Though it is better suited for larger pattern impressions such as shoeprints, it can occasionally help with fingerprint exposure. It reacts with the blood’s hemoglobin, causing it to fluoresce when viewed in dark conditions. The glow doesn’t last long, so once the print is exposed it must be photographed.
Luminol reacts with extremely small traces of blood—down to parts per billion. It can find blood where none seems to exist. Scenes that are many years old or have been cleaned or painted over still hold traces of blood, and luminol will reveal them. Because luminol is so sensitive in locating blood residue, it not only locates very dilute traces of blood but also helps reconstruct a crime scene by uncovering a bloody trail.
Amido Black 
Amido black is also called Naphthalene blue-black. It reacts with blood proteins and turns the bloody print a blue-black color. The print is then photographed for later comparisons.
DIGITALLY ENHANCING PRINTS 
More often than not a print or partial print is unclear and its minute detail is fuzzy or difficult to see well. Digital technology can help remedy this. The print is scanned into a computer and then subjected to one of many programs that can enhance and clean up a photo. Changing the light, contrast, clarity, and background patterns can make a previously obscure print jump into view. This makes the hand-matching process faster and more accurate.
GLOVE PRINTS 
Some criminals wear gloves to prevent leaving behind prints. Thin latex surgical-type gloves are sometimes so thin that the friction ridges still protrude and their pattern might be left on a smooth surface if the glove is contaminated with blood, grease, paint, or some similar substance. In addition, there have been cases where the perpetrator tossed aside these gloves after use and his fingerprints were obtained from inside the gloves’ fingertips.
But even using leather or cloth gloves is no guarantee of anonymity. Though the person’s fingerprints are not left, the pattern of the glove fingertips or palm might be. If the glove has defects, such as snags in cloth gloves or creases and scars on the surface of leather ones, these can leave a distinctive patterned print at the scene. If the gloves are located and the examiner is able to match the print to defects in the gloves, this can be strong evidence that the gloves in question were used during the commission of the crime. This would be similar evidence to shoeprints or tire tracks (see Chapter Fourteen). 
