---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_011.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["evidence", "scene", "crime", "may", "suspect", "must", "item", "would", "warrant", "blood", "perpetrator", "victim", "found", "search", "area", "fiber", "police", "might", "type", "murder", "lab", "also", "fingerprint", "example", "witness"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit011html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 2 
EVIDENCE: 
THE HEART AND SOUL OF FORENSICS  
If Locard’s Exchange Principle is the cornerstone of forensic science, evidence is the heart and soul of the crime lab. Indeed, evidence is the sole reason it exists. Without evidence, what would the lab do? Evidence is used to determine if a crime has been committed, to link a suspect to a scene, to corroborate or refute an alibi or statement, to identify a perpetrator or victim, to exonerate the innocent, to induce a confession, and to direct further investigation.
The modern crime lab attempts to identify and compare any evidence it receives and then links this evidence to a particular individual to the exclusion of all others.
This brings up a critical concept: Evidence is used to eliminate suspects rather than to point the finger at any one person. Individualizing evidence eliminates everyone else and leaves the perpetrator standing alone.
This isn’t a modern concept. Again, we look to Sherlock Holmes, who discusses in several of his stories his belief that good evidence and clear reasoning would eliminate all choices but one. My favorite comes from “The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet” in which he states, “It is an old maxim of mine that when you have excluded the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.”
We will look at the discriminatory power of evidence later in this chapter, but first let’s see how evidence is classified.
EVIDENCE CLASSIFICATION  
DIRECT AND CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE 
Evidence may be either direct or circumstantial. Direct evidence directly establishes a fact. Examples are eyewitness statements and confessions, which are subjective by nature and, as such, are burdened with the problems that plague all subjective information. Eyewitnesses are notoriously incorrect in their identification of a suspect and their recall of events because memory and recall are affected by the witnesses’ mental and physical health and abilities, prejudices, experiences, and the emotion of the situation. What if the witness had poor vision or poor hearing, or held racial prejudices, or was highly emotional? Could his perception of who did what to whom, when, and how be distorted? Absolutely. Though most often these distortions are not intentional, they exist nonetheless. Studies of this phenomenon have shown that eyewitnesses may be wrong as much as 50 percent of the time.
On the other hand, circumstantial evidence is more objective and is subject to the laws of probability. This leads to the curious fact that circumstantial evidence is often more reliable than direct evidence. Unlike an eyewitness account, accurate science is not altered by subjectivity. Its interpretation might be, but the result is the result.
Circumstantial evidence is any evidence that is not direct. Blood, hair, fibers, bullets, DNA—indeed, all forensic science evidence—are circumstantial in nature. This type of evidence requires that the judge and jury infer something from the presented evidentiary fact. For example, if a fingerprint or hair found at the crime scene is matched to a suspect, the jury may infer that the print is that of the defendant and the fact that it was found at the crime scene links the defendant to the scene. Under most circumstances, this is not absolute proof, but is highly suggestive that he was involved in the crime.
PHYSICAL AND BIOLOGICAL EVIDENCE 
Forensic evidence can also be physical or biological. Physical evidence might take the form of fingerprints, shoe and tire impressions, tool marks, fibers, paint, glass, drugs, firearms, bullets and shell casings, documents, explosives, and petroleum byproduct fire accelerants. Biological evidence would be a corpse, blood, saliva, semen, hair, and botanical materials, such as wood, plants, and pollen.
USING EVIDENCE 
Crime scene evidence, as well as other types of evidence, may serve many purposes in criminal investigations:
CORPUS DELICTI: This Latin term means “the body of the crime,” or the essential facts of the crime. Evidence will reveal exactly what type of crime was committed.
MODUS OPERANDI (MO): The steps and methods the perpetrator employed to commit the crime. A criminal’s methods tend to be repetitive so that identification of his MO can help with uncovering or trapping the perpetrator.
LINKAGE: The association, or linking, of a suspect to a victim, place, or other evidence is critical to solving the crime.
VERIFICATION: Evidence can substantiate or refute suspect or witness statements and show who is lying and who is speaking the truth.
SUSPECT IDENTIFICATION: Evidence such as fingerprints or DNA can often identify the perpetrator.
CRIME SCENE RECONSTRUCTION: The evidence often allows investigators to reconstruct the sequence of events of the crime.
INVESTIGATIVE LEADS: Evidence will frequently direct the lines of investigation that the police and coroner follow and often lead them to the perpetrator. From a forensic sense, evidence serves many functions. It can identify and compare evidence items, display its inherent class and individual characteristics, reconstruct the crime’s sequence of events, and associate or dissociate a suspect from the crime.
IDENTIFICATION AND COMPARISON 
The forensic analysis of evidence items is done for two main purposes: identification and comparison. Identification is done to determine what exactly a particular item or substance is. Is this white powder heroin or crystal methamphetamine or sugar? Who manufactured the shoe that left the print at the crime scene? Are there petrochemical residues present in the debris of a suspicious fire? Is this brown carpet stain dried blood or chocolate sauce?
Identification in such circumstances is critical since, if the powder is sugar and not heroin or the stain is indeed chocolate sauce and not blood, there might be no crime at all. Conversely, if heroin or blood is identified, either may become the crucial evidence in a criminal proceeding. Such identifications make up an important part of the work done by the crime lab. After testing, the examiner may state that the questioned substance is present, not present, or that the testing is inconclusive and the presence of the substance can be neither ruled in nor out.
Comparisons are done to see if a suspect item or substance shares a common origin with a known one. That is, did they come from the same person, place, or object? Did this fingerprint, hair, or blood come from the suspect? Does this paint smudge found on a hit-and-run victim’s clothing match that of the suspect’s car? Does the bullet removed from a murder victim match the one test-fired from the suspect’s gun?
For example, after comparing a crime scene fingerprint to one obtained from a suspect, the examiner may state that the two match (bad news for the suspect), do not match (may exonerate the suspect), or that the comparison was inconclusive, perhaps because the crime scene print was of poor quality. In the last case, the suspect is neither cleared nor condemned.
CLASS VS. INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS 
Some types of evidence carry more weight than others. Hair and fibers can suggest, while DNA and fingerprints can absolutely make a connection. The difference is that some evidence shares class characteristics and others individual characteristics.
Class characteristics are those that are not unique to a particular object, but rather serve to place the particular bit of evidence into a specific class. For example, if a victim has been shot, the determination that the bullet was from a .38 caliber handgun would make all .38 caliber handguns the possible murder weapon. Other calibers would not belong to this class and would be excluded from consideration. Alternatively, blood recovered from a crime scene could be found to be type B. It could have come from any of the tens of millions of people who share this blood type. If the suspect has type B blood, he remains a suspect and DNA testing will be required to conclusively match the sample to the suspect. But if he has type A blood, he is excluded.
A single piece of class evidence can rarely convict, but it can often exonerate. The above type B blood would exclude all persons with a different blood type. They belong to a different class and only those in the class of individuals with type B blood would remain in the suspect pool. However, if multiple types of class evidence are associated with one suspect, the weight of the evidence may make a strong case. A classic example is the Atlanta child murders case.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE ATLANTA CHILD MURDERS 
In Atlanta, Georgia, during the late 1970s and early 1980s, young black children began disappearing, their bodies turning up along and in nearby rivers. The situation created near hysteria in the area and became racially charged with accusations and speculations about who might be killing the children. The FBI was called in and the story filled newspapers from coast to coast. It was felt that the killer was tossing the bodies into the rivers from bridges, so stakeouts were set up. Early in the morning of May 22, 1981, Atlanta police officers, while staking out a bridge over the Chattahoochee River, heard a splash and found a young black man on the bridge. His name was Wayne Williams. He was questioned and released. Five days later the body of twenty-seven-year-old Nathaniel Cater washed to shore downstream from the bridge and Wayne Williams became a prime suspect. He was arrested on June 21.
In December 1981, Williams was tried for the Atlanta child murders based largely on class fiber evidence. Multiple fibers, twenty-eight different types in all, were found on several of the victims. These fibers chemically and optically matched fibers taken from Williams’s home and cars. Blue, yellow, white, and yellow-green fibers of various synthetic types were similar to fibers taken from Williams’s kitchen and backroom carpets, bedspread, throw rug, and car liner. Hairs matching those of his dog were also found. Williams was convicted.
In cases such as this, the sheer number of the pieces of class evidence makes coincidence extremely unlikely. What are the odds that someone else left behind this combination of fibers and hair? Though class evidence is not absolute proof that a suspect is connected to a particular location, and each bit of class evidence taken alone may not be strong, when a large number of matching evidence is found, the odds that the suspect was present at the crime scene becomes overwhelming.
Individual characteristics are as close to absolute proof of the origin of the evidence item as is possible. The most individualizing types of evidence are finger-prints and DNA, since no two people possess either the same prints or the same DNA (the exception being identical twins who have the same DNA but different fingerprints). Impression evidence, such as bullet ballistic markings, shoe and tire tracks, and tool marks, may be unique enough to be considered individual evidence. Also, fracture or tear patterns, such as in broken glass, torn paper, or matches ripped from a matchbook, may possess edges that fit perfectly together like a jigsaw puzzle, thus indicating the pieces shared a common source.
The overriding principle in the analysis of individual characteristics is that no two things are exactly alike. No two guns mark a bullet the same way. No two pieces of glass fracture in the same manner. No two pairs of shoes or sets of car tires wear in exactly the same way.
The goal of the criminalist is to identify individualizing characteristics, for these truly “make the case” by positively identifying the source of the questioned evidence. If ballistics matched the markings on a .38 caliber bullet to those from a bullet test-fired by a suspect weapon, these markings are individual evidence. They separate this particular gun from all other .38 caliber weapons and indicate that this particular .38 was the murder weapon. Similarly, in the earlier type B blood example we just discussed, DNA could be used to eliminate all of the people with type B blood except for the one person who actually left the blood at the crime scene.
The bottom line is that class evidence can considerably narrow the field of suspects and individual evidence can narrow it further, perhaps to a single person.
RECONSTRUCTIVE AND ASSOCIATIVE EVIDENCE 
Whether the evidence is class or individual in quality, it may be used to reconstruct the events of the crime or to associate a suspect with the crime scene.
Reconstructive evidence is any evidence that helps in reconstructing the crime scene. Broken glass or pried doors and windows may reveal the perpetrator’s points of entry and exit. Was the window broken from the inside or the outside? Did the perpetrator use a key or a screwdriver to gain entry? Shoe prints, blood spatters, and the trajectory of bullets may show where in the room everyone was and exactly how and in what sequence the crime occurred. Was the victim attacked from the front or from behind? Was the murder quick or did a struggle occur? Was the prime suspect at the scene at the time of the murder or did he, as he says, stumble into the scene later? Reconstructive evidence helps the ME determine who did what, where, when, and how, as well as helps determine who is being truthful and who might be lying. Crime scene reconstruction is discussed in greater detail later in the chapter.
Associative evidence is evidence that ties the suspect to the crime scene. Fingerprints, shoeprints, hair, fibers, blood and other body fluids, knives, bullets, guns, and paint, among others, may be used to link the suspect to the scene, or prove that the fingerprints, hair, or blood is not his and that someone else must have committed the crime.
This linkage was discussed in Chapter One, but is worth a brief mention here. Evidence is supposed to link a suspect to a person, place, or object. The finding of a victim’s hair or fibers from the victim’s clothing on the clothing of the suspect suggests that they had some degree of contact, and thus links the two together. A suspect’s fingerprint, blood, or semen at the scene of a robbery, murder, or rape strongly links him to the crime scene. A murder weapon that holds a suspect’s fingerprints requires a great deal of explaining. Each of these circumstances links elements of the crime to the suspect. The link can be established through the criminalists collecting evidence and the analytical procedures of the crime lab work. When successful, the evidence may find its way into court and result in a conviction.
COLLECTING EVIDENCE  
Police, criminalists, and coroner’s technicians are charged with locating, protecting, collecting, and transporting evidence to the crime lab or the coroner’s office. The coroner and the crime lab technicians then analyze each piece of evidence. Each step in this chain must be done properly, with great attention to detail, or the evidence could be deemed inadmissible in court.
EVIDENCE LOCATION 
Before evidence can be collected and processed, it must be located. Often this is straightforward. A caller reports a burglary, and when the police arrive the caller invites them in and shows them the location of the pried window, the family safe, and the open door escape route. But, what if the probable location of the evidence is not associated with a crime scene and the police are not invited into the area where the evidence might be located? To enter and search the location, they need a search warrant.
Search Warrants 
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution protects citizens “against unreasonable searches and seizures.” This means that police personnel and crime scene investigators need a warrant from a judge before they can search private property for evidence. This warrant must be specific as to time, place, and items to be searched for and must be obtained based on “probable cause.” The police petition a judge to sign a search warrant. Only a law enforcement officer may obtain a search warrant; attorneys, private investigators, and private citizens cannot.
The steps required to obtain a valid search warrant are:
PREPARE AN AFFIDAVIT: This must describe the location to be searched, the items to be searched for, and the reasons why the officer expects the items are at the location (probable cause).
PREPARE THE WARRANT: This is the official document that the judge must sign to give permission for the search.
GET THE WARRANT SIGNED: The officer must present the warrant and affidavit to the judge. If the judge feels that probable cause exists, he signs the warrant, making it official. 
Often this is simple, but sometimes it can be very difficult. The three issues that can make obtaining and executing a warrant problematic are probable cause, specificity of the search, and the area to be searched.
Probable Cause 
Probable cause means that the officer has a strong concrete reason to believe that the items in question are at the location to be searched. A hunch or a mere suspicion won’t work.
Let’s say an arms supplier has a safe house where he sells his wares. The police have observed known arms dealers come and go with crates that could contain guns. The investigators may even know who has received the illegal weapons. This is more than a hunch. It’s fairly solid evidence that the packages coming and going from the house contain weapons. In this case a warrant would most likely be issued.
Another common scenario is for the police to have the word of an informant that some illegal activity has taken place at a certain location. Before the judge issues a warrant on the word of an informant, though, he may require that the police show that the informant has been reliable in the past.
On the other hand, the judge might not issue the warrant if he feels the necessary probable cause does not exist: Maybe the informant is unreliable or has no track record with the police or the evidence submitted in support of the warrant request isn’t strong enough. A witness simply seeing a blue SUV near the crime scene would not likely be sufficient to obtain a warrant to search a suspect’s blue SUV or his home.
Specificity of the Search 
The search warrant must state exactly what the police are looking for. They can’t simply say that they are going in to search a house and see what they find. The warrant application should list that they are looking for specific items. In the case of the arms dealer, they would be searching for rifles, handguns, and other ballistic weapons, ammunition, crates containing weapons, and any paper or computer records of arms transactions. Once the warrant is granted, the police could then search any area where these might be found. The house, the attic, the garage, closets, crawl spaces, and anywhere else guns could be hidden would be fair game, as well as any filing cabinets or computers.
What if in the course of their search for the items listed they find other evidence or illegal items? Can these be seized? This is an interesting legal problem and the answer is sometimes yes, sometimes no.
What if the warrant only listed gun crates and not handguns, papers, or computers? The police could then only search areas that could actually conceal a crate. Rooms, attics, closets, and basements would be searchable areas. A kitchen drawer would not. If they opened a drawer and found drugs or a weapon, they could not seize it and use it in court. For this reason, the police attempt to include a number of small items in the warrant since this will allow for a much more inclusive search. In the arms dealer scenario, they would include handguns, papers, and computers, maybe even drugs. These small items can be hidden almost anywhere, which would allow investigators to look through more places.
Area of Search 
Another difficulty is the definition of the area to be searched must be explicitly stated. For example, if the warrant identifies a house but does not specifically state that the garage or storage shed can be searched, these areas will be off limits. If the warrant lists a garage but not the car inside, the garage can be searched but not the car.
As you can see, obtaining a proper warrant is not as simple as it appears on television. It requires attention to detail. A case can fall apart when these finer points are overlooked.
Searching Without a Warrant 
As previously discussed, the Fourth Amendment requires that a probable cause warrant be obtained in order for a location to be searched, but there are times that a search can be undertaken without a warrant. If a suspect is destroying evidence, or a structure fire is threatening to do the same, can the police save the evidence? Sometimes, yes. The Supreme Court has allowed “warrant-less” searches in some of the following types of situations.
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS: If an emergency exists where someone’s life or health is in danger, the police may enter without a warrant. Any evidence found during this emergency entry may be used. But the police cannot make an emergency entrance, leave, and then return at a later date to search for evidence. This second entry would require a warrant.
IMMEDIATE LOSS OF EVIDENCE: This exception would apply in the case of the suspect or some other agent, such as a structure fire, threatening to destroy evidence.
LAWFUL ARREST: If a suspect has been lawfully arrested, he and any property in his immediate control, such as a home or vehicle, may be searched for evidence.
CONSENTED SEARCH: No warrant is needed if the party in question consents to a search of his person or property.
Once the search is done and the evidence is found, what then? The evidence must be protected, collected, and properly preserved.
PROTECTING THE EVIDENCE 
Protecting the crime scene and evidence is of paramount importance. Law enforcement’s ability to successfully investigate and prosecute a crime can be lost at this critical point. Even the most expensively equipped and sophisticated crime lab can do little with damaged, altered, or contaminated evidence, and courts rarely allow such evidence to be presented to the jury.
This crucial duty of the initial protection of the evidence falls to the first responding officer. He must approach the crime scene in a logical and organized manner. Failure to do this may lead to harm to himself, fellow officers, victims, witnesses, or suspects. For example, a violent perpetrator could still be at the scene or a burned building could be structurally unsound or broken glass could cause bodily injury. Evidence can also be damaged, destroyed, or rendered useless.
The first responding officer detains any witnesses while not allowing them access to the crime scene. Since he has no way of knowing if the person who reported the crime is a witness or a suspect—it is not rare for the perpetrator to report the crime himself, perhaps believing this will make him less of a suspect— allowing entry to the actual scene could lead to loss or contamination of evidence. It is also not uncommon for perpetrators to attempt to destroy or remove evidence.
Once at the scene, personal safety is the officer’s primary concern. He makes sure that the perpetrators are no longer present or a threat. If present, they are arrested and secured. Then, he assists any victims, offers first aid as needed, and mobilizes emergency medical services. After that is completed, he begins the process of crime scene preservation.
Concurrent with this he may need to detain and separate all suspects and witnesses in order avoid collusion between them. At this stage he may not know who is a suspect and who is a witness. A witness may turn into a suspect and a suspect may actually be a useful witness. He may have no reason or legal right to detain some witnesses. If this is the case, he must obtain accurate identification and contact information from each person who leaves the area.
At the heart of crime scene protection is our old friend Locard’s Exchange Principle in the previous chapter. It states that when any two people come in contact with each other, they will exchange or transfer trace materials. Hair, fibers, and prints are classic examples. The same is true for a crime scene. Every person who enters the scene can leave behind evidence of their presence, take away crucial trace evidence on their shoes, clothes, or hands, or damage or alter any evidence that remains. For this reason, access to the scene must be restricted immediately and all witnesses and suspects are denied entry to the crime scene area.
THE CRIME SCENE  
What constitutes a crime scene? Obviously it varies from scene to scene, but the officer must quickly decide its size and boundaries. The scene typically includes the offense site as well as areas of approach, entry, exit, and escape. The offense site might be the body location (in a murder), a safe or cabinet (in a burglary), or an entire structure (in a suspicious fire). The entire scene might include the street in front of a house or the entire block, or an adjacent building or a nearby field or wooded area.
The crime scene is first cordoned off, using crime scene tape, barricades, automobiles, or other officers. Only the personnel absolutely needed to process the scene should be allowed in. This is often more difficult that it seems. Victim’s family members and neighbors may be emotionally unstable and difficult to remove from the area. Members of the press are often clever in their methods to gain entry. A lowly patrol officer may have trouble preventing a police captain or other high-ranking official, who has no real reason to be there, from entering the scene. And never underestimate the meanderings of the curious bystander.
Once he has established the perimeter, the officer creates a security log, which must be signed by all visitors to the scene. This helps the investigation in many ways, not the least of which is narrowing the number of people who must be examined when stray fingerprints and shoeprints are found. If the investigators can be ruled out, the print may belong to the perpetrator.
After this, the crime scene investigator does a walk-through examination to get a feel for the scene so he can organize the approach to evidence collection. During this overview, he typically doesn’t examine any particular piece of evidence, but tries to see the entire picture.
While processing the scene, everything that transpires is documented in notes, sketches and photographs, and perhaps on videotape. This includes not only the scene and the evidence, but also the surrounding area, particularly any of the perpetrator’s possible entry and exit points.
A designated note taker is assigned the job of keeping an accurate account of all activities within the crime scene. Sometimes a tape recorder is used and the tape is later transcribed. Regardless, detailed notes must be kept. A description of the scene and an accurate list of each piece of evidence, noting its description, where, by whom, and at what time it was found, as well as its final disposition, must be made. He also identifies and comments on each photo that is taken.
The crime scene is photographed as early as possible so that it can be preserved in its unaltered condition. Photos should definitely be taken before any evidence, including the body, is moved. Several overview images of the scene and, if outdoors, the surrounding area are taken from multiple angles. Close-ups of each item of evidence and all injuries to the corpse are critical. Videotape has the advantage of including sound so that comments can be added. But if video is used, photographs are also taken since they offer much greater detail resolution.
Full-body photos are taken of any injured parties, including the suspect, as well as close-ups of any injuries. Whether these are done at the scene or at the hospital (even in the operating room) depends on the nature of the injuries. Bumps, bruises, and scratches can be done at the scene, while major traumas and gunshot and knife wounds will require that the victim be transported to the hospital, so photos can be shot there.
Figure 2-1: Crime scene sketch. The sketch must be clear, complete, and show the coordinate positions of each evidence item. 
Sketches are extremely important. They show the relationship of each item of evidence to the other items or the body (see Figure 2-1). Each piece of evidence must be indicated and located by its distance from two fixed points, such as a wall, doorway, fire hydrant, or sidewalk. This triangulation gives the exact graphic coordinates of each item. Sketches made at the scene may be rough, but must be accurate. They can later be redrawn for clarity and aesthetics. There are several computer programs available that can help with making clear drawings.
LOCATING AND PRESERVING THE EVIDENCE 
Once the crime scene has been defined and protected and the initial walk-through completed, the tedious task of evidence collection begins. This is neither as sexy nor as cool as it appears on television and is, in fact, quite laborious when done properly.
Who has the duty of evidence collection depends upon the size, budget, and organization of the crime lab or law enforcement agency charged with investigating the crime. In smaller, less well-funded jurisdictions, police officers perform this duty, while larger, more sophisticated labs have special evidence-collection units. These are the CSI people. Regardless of who actually gathers the evidence, they should be well schooled in proper techniques.
The first step is to locate the evidence within the crime scene. Corpses and weapons may be readily visible, but other items, particularly smaller materials and bits of trace evidence, must be searched for. Points of entry and exit, as well as the area near the body (in homicides) or open safes, cabinets, or drawers (in robberies), are targeted since these are the areas where most evidence is typically found. The reason for this goes back once again to Locard’s Exchange Principle. The perpetrator, of necessity, will have come into close contact with the body or the safe and will have passed through areas of approach, entry, exit, and escape. He might leave behind fingerprints, shoeprints, tire tracks, blood, hair, fiber, bits of broken glass, or paint chips. He might toss the murder weapon or the tool used to gain entrance along his escape route. He might accidentally drop a bloody glove. These items must be searched for.
GATHERING THE EVIDENCE 
There is an order to evidence gathering. The first evidence searched for and collected is the most fragile or the most likely to be lost, damaged, or contaminated. This is particularly true in outdoor scenes, where wind and rain may complicate things. Fragile evidence might include blood, fibers, hair, even fingerprints or shoe and tire tracks. It all depends on the situation.
In later chapters, we will look at the techniques for locating and collecting the specific types of evidence typically encountered in criminal investigations. For now we will take a general overview of the collection process.
Obvious and exposed latent fingerprints are photographed and then “lifted” (see Chapter Twelve). The same is true for tool marks and shoe or tire impressions, which are photographed before being lifted or cast. Fibers and hair are searched for with alternative light sources and picked up with tweezers. Carpets and furniture are vacuumed, using a fresh vacuum cleaner bag for each area. This often yields hair, fibers, and other trace material that escape the technician’s eye at the scene.
To avoid damage and cross contamination, each piece of evidence must be packaged separately. Most dry trace evidence can be placed in druggist’s folds, which are small, folded papers. Envelopes, canisters, plastic pill bottles, and paper or plastic bags may also be used. Documents are sealed in plastic covers for transport to the lab.
Liquid evidence is put into unbreakable, airtight containers. This is also true for solids that may contain volatile evidence, such as fire remnants that are believed to contain residues of hydrocarbon accelerants. Left unsealed, these residues may evaporate before testing can be done. Clean paint cans and tightly sealed jars work well in this situation.
Moist or wet biological evidence must be placed in non-airtight containers so that it may air dry. If not, the moisture can cause mold, mildew, and bacterial growth, which can lead to decay and destruction of the sample. Bloody clothing is often hung up and allowed to thoroughly air dry. After the biological material dries, the evidence is repackaged into sealed containers.
Sometimes it is difficult or impossible to remove the evidence from the scene without damaging it. A tool mark on a pried window seal can be processed at the scene or the entire window frame can be removed and taken to the lab. Bullet holes in a concrete wall may likewise be processed on site or a portion of the wall can be carefully removed for later laboratory evaluation.
Another important aspect of evidence collection is obtaining proper control samples, which are samples used as a standard of comparison for checking or verifying the results of an experiment. These may come from the victim, suspect, or items at the scene. An automobile interior carpet fiber found at the scene is most valuable if control fibers are available from the car of the suspect’s vehicle. This way, the identified or control sample can be matched to the unidentified crime scene sample. Control samples of blood taken from the victim and the suspect can be matched to an unknown bloodstain found at the scene to see which one of them, if either, shed the blood.
Sometimes control samples take the form of substrates that are identical to the substrate of the evidence item in question. A substrate is any object, material, or environment on which something else acts, is placed, or is combined with. For example, a charred carpet that is suspected of containing residue of an accelerant such as gasoline is best compared against the exact same carpet that is free of the suspect material. A carpet sample taken in an area undamaged by the fire may provide the known sample. If the examiner finds a suspicious hydrocarbon chemical in the charred carpet that is not present in the known sample, he can be more certain that it is indeed a foreign chemical and not a component of the carpet or its adhesive.
Chain of Custody 
The chain of custody is absolutely paramount in evidence collection. Without this continuity of possession, the evidence may be rendered inadmissible in court. The defense would rightly call into question the authenticity and integrity of the evidence since outside contamination cannot be ruled out. For this reason, every person who handles the evidence must be accounted for and recorded, and this chain of custody must remain unbroken from crime scene to courtroom.
The person who finds the evidence item must mark it for identification. This consists of writing or scratching his initials onto the item itself. Of course, it must be possible for him to do this without damaging the evidence or altering any of its specific identifying characteristics. For example, he may scratch his initials on the side of a shell casing. Later in court, he can then positively identify this shell casing as the exact one he found at the scene. He would not likely do this with a bullet, since the striations on the side of the bullet would be altered, making a ballistic match more difficult. The item is then placed into an evidence bag, which is also marked and initialed by the finder. The identifying information on the evidence bag includes the case number, the name and description of the item, the person who found it, witnesses to the discovery and recovery, and the date, time, and location of the find.
If the item itself cannot be safely marked, it is placed into the appropriate container or packaging. This in turn is placed into an evidence bag. Both the item container and the evidence bag must be marked and initialed. For example, a blood sample may be taken using a moist cotton-tipped swab. After drying, the swab is placed into a sealed glass tube and the tube is marked with the collector’s initials and the date. The tube is placed into an evidence bag, which is similarly marked. The collector may then reasonably testify that this is the sample he obtained by identifying his initials on the sample tube and the evidence bag.
Each person who accepts the evidence must initial or sign and date the evidence bag. He is then responsible for the integrity of the item until he passes it to someone else. Let’s go back to the example of the shell casing found at a homicide scene. After the finding officer collects it, marks it, and places it into a marked evidence bag, he signs the bag of evidence over to the crime scene coordinator, who then transports it to the lab and signs it over to the crime lab technician. After the testing and evaluation of the item is completed, the technician signs it over to the custodian of evidence, who places it in a secured area until next needed. It is then signed over to the prosecution for presentation in court. If this chain remains intact, each witness—the finding officer, the crime scene coordinator, the lab technician, and the custodian of evidence—can testify that the item presented in the courtroom is indeed the item collected at the scene and tested by the lab.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY CRIME SCENES 
We’ve looked at how a crime scene is defined and controlled and how evidence is located, preserved, and collected. But what if there is more than one crime scene? What if the criminal moved from place to place during his criminal activity?
Crime scenes can be considered primary or secondary. The primary scene is where the crime actually occurred, while any subsequent scenes are deemed secondary. In a bank robbery, the bank would be the primary scene while the getaway car and the thief’s hideout would be secondary scenes. Or, if a killer commits a murder at someone’s home, but transports the victim’s body to another location, such as a river for disposal, the home would be the primary scene and the perpetrator’s car and the river would be secondary scenes. Primary scenes typically yield more usable evidence than secondary scenes, but not always.
Sometimes only a secondary scene is available. If a body is found at a “dump site,” this would be a secondary scene. The primary scene, where the murder actually occurred, is not known. Investigators use the evidence found at the secondary scene in an attempt to identify the killer or to locate the primary scene. For example, fibers from an expensive or unusual carpet may be found on the victim. Investigators might be able to use this evidence to identify the manufacturer and the seller and ultimately to create a list of buyers or locations where that particular product has been installed. This may greatly narrow the focus of the investigation and may lead to the primary crime scene and the perpetrator.
CRIME SCENE RECONSTRUCTION 
I mentioned earlier that one of the functions of evidence is to reconstruct a crime scene. Crime scene reconstruction is both science and art. The main goals of the reconstruction process are to determine the likely sequence of events and the locations and positions of everyone present during the crime. This information may be critical in determining suspect truthfulness and witness reliability.
The first question the investigators must answer about the crime scene is whether it is dynamic (also called active) or static (also called passive). This means whether committing the crime involved a great deal of activity. For example, let’s say that a murder victim was stabbed multiple times. If the scene is relatively undisturbed with the victim lying on the floor in a pool of blood, this would likely be a static scene. On the other hand, if furniture is toppled over or objects have been knocked off tables or desks, or if a blood trail leads from place to place or room to room, this would indicate a more dynamic scene. It would also indicate that a struggle took place. These are two entirely different scenes and would result from different sequences of events. If suspect or witness statements as to what happened are counter to what is seen, suspicions are raised.
After the investigator does his initial walk-through of the scene, he begins to mentally formulate a hypothesis for the events of the crime. He then looks at each piece of physical evidence to see if it supports this theory. He considers information obtained at the scene and also from the crime lab, the medical reports of any injured persons, and the ME’s autopsy examination. Anything that does not fit must be reconciled or the theory must change. This means that the reconstruction of the scene constantly evolves as more evidence is uncovered.
The investigator continually tests his theory not only against the evidence but also against logic and common sense. But he must not make assumptions. It may seem logical that a perpetrator did a certain thing or that a piece of evidence ended up where it did because of some action by the perpetrator, but if the hard evidence doesn’t support this belief, the theory must be re-evaluated. If a gun is found just outside the rear door of the house where a homicide occurred, logic suggests that the assailant dropped the gun during his escape. Possible, but what if the gun had been tossed there in an attempt to stage a domestic homicide to make it look as though a breaking-and-entering homicide had occurred? The husband’s fingerprints on the gun or the victim’s blood on the husband’s shoes might change the theory. In reconstruction, all evidence must be considered and explained.
Shoeprints may reveal the perpetrator’s every step. Fingerprints may indicate the things he touched. Tool marks are often found at points of entry or where safes or cabinets were pried open. Blood spatters, bullet trajectories, the angle of blows and stabs, and the nature of the victim’s injuries as determined by live examination or at autopsy may reveal the actual and relative positions of the assailant and the victim. Reading the pattern of post-mortem lividity of the corpse (see Chapter Five) may confirm that the body was moved several hours after death. The discovery of attempts to clean up the scene may contradict a suspect’s story.
The reconstruction of the crime scene must take all of this and more into consideration. As I said, it is both science and art and takes a skilled and experienced investigator to put all the evidence together and create a “picture” of the crime.
THE STAGED CRIME SCENE 
Crime scene reconstruction is invaluable in determining that a crime scene has been staged. Staging is when the perpetrator alters the scene in an attempt to make the scene look like something it’s not. The most common staging scenario is when the perpetrator tries to make a murder look like a suicide or an accident. For example, let’s say a husband strikes his wife in the head with a blunt object, killing her. He cleans up the bedroom, moves her into the bathroom, and places her in the tub. He then calls the paramedics and says she fell while bathing. Or he might leave her body in the bedroom and try to make it look like a robbery-murder by breaking windows or prying locks.
Another scenario would be to make a homicide look like a suicide. What if the husband surreptitiously fed his wife enough alcohol and sedatives to kill her and then forged a suicide note?
A self-robbery may be staged to look like breaking and entering. Maybe jewelry is missing and a window is pried—and, of course, the jewelry is insured.
Tearing or removing part or all of a murder victim’s clothing may be done to suggest that the crime was sexually motivated when it was not.
Arson may also be considered staging. In this situation, the perpetrator sets the fire to cover another crime, maybe murder, maybe embezzlement. His hope is that the fire will obscure the signs of murder on the body or destroy the papers that show he took the missing money.
In each of these situations, the work of investigators, the medical examiner, and the crime lab may tell a different story than the perpetrator intended. The pattern of the wife’s head injury might not match the edge of the tub but the baseball bat in the closet instead—the bat with the faint bloodstain unnoticed by the husband. The forensic document examiner might quickly discover that the suicide note was not written by the victim but rather by her husband. He may also be able to recover information from the burned documents in the fire. The lack of carbon monoxide in the victim’s blood and soot in his airways may indicate that he was dead before the fire started. These findings reveal that the sequence of events were not what they initially seemed to be or were claimed to be by the perpetrator. 
