---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_018.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["victim", "death", "may", "blood", "oxygen", "carbon", "strangulation", "ligature", "body", "neck", "monoxide", "might", "water", "hanging", "lung", "gas", "air", "cause", "also", "often", "asphyxia", "found", "accidental", "used", "percent"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit018html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 8 
ASPHYXIA: 
DEPRIVING THE BODY OF OXYGEN  
Asphyxia is defined as the deprivation of oxygen to the cells of the body. It can occur in many ways. Under normal circumstances, air contains an adequate amount of oxygen (O2). Once in the lungs’ air sacs, the oxygen crosses into the blood, combines with the hemoglobin of the red blood cells, and is transported throughout the body, where the cells extract the oxygen from the hemoglobin. An interruption of the supply of oxygen at any step in this process can lead to asphyxia.
Asphyxia may result from:
• suffocation 
• strangulation 
• toxic gases 
• drowning  
SUFFOCATION  
Suffocation occurs whenever sufficient oxygen is unable to reach the bloodstream. The air might be poor in oxygen or some blockage or obstruction might prevent it from entering the lungs or the bloodstream. Suffocation may be divided into five general categories:
• environmental suffocation 
• smothering 
• choking 
• mechanical asphyxia 
• suffocating gases  
ENVIRONMENTAL SUFFOCATION 
This occurs whenever the environmental air possesses very low levels of oxygen. The lungs and circulatory system may be perfectly normal, but if the oxygen content of the air is deficient, it is of little use to the body. Normal air is approximately 21 percent oxygen. When this percentage drops to 10 to 15 percent, judgment and coordination suffer, and below 10 percent loss of consciousness occurs, and at around 8 percent death is all but assured.
Deaths from an oxygen-poor environment are almost always accidental, though homicide is a possibility. The classic example of an accidental death of this type is a child who locks himself in an old refrigerator. Once the oxygen is consumed, the child dies from asphyxia. This was once common, but it is now mandated that modern refrigerators have some mechanism that enables them to be opened from the inside simply with a firm push. Still, a child might not be strong enough or might not know to do this.
Another type of environmental suffocation occurs when a victim enters an enclosure that is poor in oxygen, such as some underground chambers and mines. If someone unknowingly enters, he may succumb before he is able to escape. The same is true in structure fires, where the fire consumes the oxygen and some victims die from suffocation.
There are no specific autopsy findings in most cases of environmental suffocation, so the determination of the cause and manner of death relies more on an analysis of the circumstances surrounding the death. In other words, if the victim is found in an oxygen-poor environment or an air-tight enclosure and there is no evidence of trauma or toxin exposure, and if natural causes are ruled out, the ME would likely deem the death to be an accidental suffocation.
SMOTHERING 
Smothering occurs when some external device prevents air from entering the nose or mouth. This is distinguished from choking in which the obstructing material is within the mouth or throat. Smothering deaths are usually homicidal or suicidal, but might be accidental, though that is rare.
Ambrose Tardieu (1788–1841) first described the pathological findings of suffocation. He identified small blood spots in the lung tissues of suffocation victims and named them “Tardieu spots,” a moniker that is still used today. Though not present in all cases of smothering, when present, they help the ME assess the cause of death.
Suicidal smothering usually employs a plastic bag such as a trash bag or those used by dry cleaners. The individual places the bag over his head and secures it with tape or a rope. This securing is not necessary since the plastic typically clings to the person’s face, obstructing the mouth and nose. Occasionally, the victim will bind his own hands. This is particularly true in cases of “suicide pacts” where two or more people commit the act together.
Plastic bags may also cause accidental smothering, particularly in children. Rarely, an intoxicated individual may lose consciousness face-down on a pillow and die from smothering.
Homicidal smothering usually employs a pillow, bedding, a plastic bag, or the killer’s hands. When a pillow or a plastic bag is used, marks on the victim are typically not present unless the victim puts up a struggle. If so, abrasions or bruises are often left on the victim’s face or arms by the killer’s attempts to control the victim. If there are no external bruises, no microhemorrhages (blood spots) in the lungs, and if the pillow or bag is removed before the body is found, the ME might not be able to determine the cause of death, since smothering itself leaves behind little physical evidence.
One form of homicidal smothering is when the assailant places a gag or tape over the victim’s mouth and nose. This can block the entry of air and lead to death from suffocation. On occasion, the gag may be removed before the body is found, but bruises from its application may remain. As with pillow smothering, if no bruising is found, the true cause of death can be difficult to determine.
In smothering deaths where the victim struggles, rigor mortis may appear early. Just as with deaths that occur during exercise, the struggle consumes the muscular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and leads to earlier onset of rigor (see Chapter Five: Time of Death, “Rigor Mortis”).
CHOKING 
As opposed to smothering where the blockage is outside the body, choking requires a blockage within the mouth or airways. Here the cause of death might be natural, homicidal, or accidental.
A natural choking death could result from acute fulminating epiglottitis or diphtheria. The former is an acute infection and inflammation of the epiglottis, which is the flap at the upper end of the trachea (main airway) that closes to prevent the aspiration of food and water when we swallow. It may rapidly swell and block the airway. This is a true medical emergency and must be treated immediately, usually with a tracheotomy. This is an incision into the trachea below the larynx (at the Adam’s apple) that allows air to reach the lungs.
Diptheria is a bacterial infection of the throat, caused by the bacterium Corynebacterium diphtheriae. It causes the formation of a thick, tenacious scab-like sheet called a pseudomembrane, which can peel away from the throat and obstruct the airway, causing death from asphyxia. Thanks to childhood immunization programs, diphtheria is now rare in the United States, but one hundred years ago it was a deadly childhood disease that claimed thousands of lives every year.
Homicidal choking deaths are rare. However, if the assailant gags the victim by placing a sock, cloth, ball, or other object in the victim’s mouth before the gag is applied, the victim may choke and die. As with deaths from smothering, if the choking device is removed before the body is found, the ME might not be able to determine the exact cause of death.
Most choking deaths are accidental. Children get small objects such as pieces of balloons, parts of toys, and food materials into their airways and choke. With adults, the culprit is almost always food. In fact, this is so common that it has been given the moniker “café coronary.” Typically, the victim is eating, suddenly stops talking, perhaps grabs his throat, and collapses. On the surface it looks like a heart attack, or coronary. In reality, the airway is obstructed, the victim cannot breathe, the oxygen level in his blood drops dramatically, and he collapses and dies. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is not effective in this situation because attempts to offer mouth-to-mouth respiration are futile while the airway is blocked. The Heimlich Maneuver was designed for just this situation.
With natural and accidental choking deaths, the ME usually has little difficulty in determining the cause of death, although finding food material within the victim’s airways does not absolutely indicate that the victim choked to death. Many individuals will aspirate food into their airways and lungs as they die. In this situation, obtaining a detailed history from witnesses of what happened might be the ME’s most useful information. However, if the airway is completely obstructed with a piece of meat or other firm food product, the ME should be able to state that the death was indeed from choking.
MECHANICAL ASPHYXIA 
Mechanical asphyxia results when some external force is applied to the body that prevents the expansion of the chest and thus respiration. A person trapped beneath a heavy object such as a car or a collapsed wall or ceiling can die from this mechanism. A similar circumstance occurs when people are crushed during a riot or trampled by a stampeding crowd. In this situation, the external pressure is so great that the victim literally can’t take a breath.
Boa constrictors kill exactly this way. This muscular species of snake wraps itself around its prey. With each exhalation by the prey, the snake coils a little tighter, making each successive breath increasingly shallower until the prey is trapped permanently in the position of exhalation and is unable to take another breath. Death follows quickly.
Tragically, infants may die from mechanical asphyxia when a parent rolls onto them during sleep. Such deaths are often deemed to be the result of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS), and some of them may well be from this poorly understood syndrome. True SIDS appears to be due to a defect in the brain’s respiratory center while a parent rolling onto an infant is a form of mechanical asphyxia.
A bizarre form of mechanical suffocation is known as burking, causing suffocation by covering the victim’s nose and mouth so that no marks are made on the body. This first case of this arose in the 1820s from the nefarious activities of William Burke and William Hare.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: BURKE AND HARE 
William Burke was a merchant in Edinburgh, Scotland, in the early 1800s. He bought old shoes, fixed them up, and sold them. He also trafficked in old clothes, skins, and human hair. In 1827, he hooked up with William Hare, who ran a beggar’s hotel in Tanners Close in West Port. In December of that year, a resident of the hotel named Donald died and Burke arranged to sell his body at Surgeon Square to Professor Robert Knox, who needed corpses for his dissection demonstrations.
To pull off their scam, the two men loaded Donald’s coffin with bark and it was buried in front of many witnesses. They then delivered the body to Professor Knox and received seven pounds and ten shillings in return. A business was born. Burke and Hare became grave robbers, supplying pilfered corpses to the doctor for eight pounds in summer and ten in winter.
Greed did them in. The local populace refused to die fast enough, so they resorted to kidnapping and killing people who were not likely to be missed. Burke would sit on them and hold their mouths and noses closed until they suffocated, after which he and Hare would deliver the corpse and collect their fee. Over the next year, at least sixteen people died at their hands.
Finally, a lodger at the hotel notified authorities when she discovered their last victim beneath a bed. Apparently the two men had stashed the body there while awaiting an opportunity to transport it to Surgeon Square. The two men were arrested. Hare then turned “King’s evidence” on Burke and testified against him. Burke was convicted and hanged on January 28, 1829.
SUFFOCATING GASES 
Deaths from suffocating gases can be accidental, suicidal, or homicidal, but most are accidental.
Suffocating gases are not in and of themselves toxic. That is, they are not poisons. Rather, their presence diminishes the percentage of the oxygen in the air. To understand this, let’s look at the physiology of respiration.
When you breathe, you take air and oxygen into your lungs. The oxygen then diffuses from the alveoli (air sacs of the lungs) into the bloodstream where it binds to hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is the molecule within red blood cells that carries oxygen from the lungs to the tissues and transports carbon dioxide (CO2) from the body’s cells back to the lungs. In the lungs, oxygen combines with hemoglobin to produce oxyhemoglobin, which imparts a bright red color to the blood. In the tissues of the body, carbon dioxide combines with hemoglobin to produce carbaminohemoglobin, which turns the blood dark purple. This exchange process is essential for life. Thus, arterial blood (blood rich in oxygen that is pumped out to the body through the arteries) is red, while venous blood (blood low in oxygen and high in carbon dioxide that returns to the heart through the veins) is dark purple.
If the oxygen content of the breathed air is low, the concentration of oxyhemoglobin in the blood falls rapidly. Low blood oxygen content is called hypoxia. Any gas added to air will, of necessity, lower the percentage of the air that is oxygen. Room air is approximately 21 percent oxygen. If an equal amount of a gas such as methane is added, the percentage of air present in the environment drops by 50 percent; so, the percentage of oxygen lowers to 10.5 percent. Oxygen levels this low can lead to lethargy, confusion, disorientation, loss of consciousness, and ultimately coma and death.
Carbon dioxide and methane are common examples of suffocating gases. Both are odorless, making them undetectable to the person exposed. Methane is the principle component of natural gas. The odor of household natural gas is an additive so that leaks can be detected.
Figure 8-1: Vital structures in the neck. The neck connects the brain to the body, the mouth and nose to the lungs, and the heart to the brain. 
High levels of methane and carbon dioxide may arise in sewers and mines. The victim enters the area, becomes hypoxic and confused, falls into unconsciousness and dies. At autopsy, there are no specific findings in deaths from suffocating gases. However, in methane-related deaths, the crime lab might find high levels of methane in the victim’s blood. Carbon dioxide is another story. Since carbon dioxide is a normal constitute of blood and its levels in the blood often rise around the time of death, it may be impossible to determine the cause of death when this is the culprit. Here the circumstances of the death might be the only thing that allows the ME to make the proper determination of the cause of death.
A particularly tragic case of mass carbon dioxide poisoning occurred in 1986 at Lake Nyos in Cameroon, in Africa. An odd geological event known as a limnic eruption caused a large cloud of carbon dioxide-laden water to rise up from the depths of the lake. Since carbon dioxide is slightly heavier than air, it settled like an invisible and odorless fog over a wide area, killing nearly 1,800 people and 3,500 livestock by asphyxia.
STRANGULATION  
The neck is a fragile conduit of life and a vital link between brain and body (see Figure 8-1). All neurological communication between the brain and the body passes through the neck by way of the spinal cord. All the brain’s blood supply from the heart must pass through the arteries of the neck, most importantly the two carotid arteries that lie on either side of the larynx. Air must traverse the neck in order to reach the lungs. But this highway of life is exposed and vulnerable to injury, both accidental and intentional. Asphyxia may occur if there is an obstruction to the arteries of the neck, which prevents oxygen-filled blood from reaching the brain. This is what happens in strangulation deaths.
MECHANISM OF STRANGULATION ASPHYXIA 
The cause of death in all strangulations is cerebral hypoxia, which is a low level of oxygen in the brain. This results because strangulation blocks the airway, preventing the victim from breathing, and occludes the carotid arteries, preventing the flow of blood to the brain. Of these two, the occlusion of the arteries is the predominant cause of unconsciousness and death. A person can remain awake and alive for several minutes without breathing, but if the blood supply to the brain is interrupted or severely limited, loss of consciousness can follow in a few seconds, and death in a minute or so. As we will see later in this chapter, the unexpected rapidity with which consciousness is lost during carotid compression is an important factor in deaths and brain injury from chokeholds and during autoerotic asphyxiation.
A common, though not universal, finding in all types of strangulation is petechial hemorrhages, also called petechiae, in the conjunctivae (the pink parts around the eyeball) and the sclera (the white part) of the eyes. These are small red dots or streaks that result from blood leaking into the soft conjunctivae and sclera of the eyes. With strangulation, the pressure within the veins of the neck rises suddenly and dramatically. This pressure is transmitted to the veins of the eyes, causing them to leak blood and produce the petechial hemorrhages.
In strangulations, some outside force compresses the airways and blood vessels of the neck. This compression prevents blood from reaching the brain and air from entering the lungs. There are three basic types of strangulation:
MANUAL STRANGULATION: strangulation using only the hands 
LIGATURE STRANGULATION: strangulation using rope, cord, wire, or other flexible material 
HANGINGS: strangulation in which the body weight is used to tighten the ligature, most often a rope  
Manual and ligature strangulation are essentially always homicide, while hangings are predominately suicidal (except for judicial hangings). Each of these strangulation types results in the same mechanism of death.
MANUAL STRANGULATION 
Manual strangulation occurs when pressure from a hand, forearm, or other limb is applied to the victim’s neck, compressing the airway and the carotid arteries. Since it is virtually impossible to manually strangle yourself, manual strangulations are homicidal.
The marks found on the victim’s neck are a combination of contusions and abrasions. The pressure from the assailant’s fingers and thumbs often leave bruises in the shape of fingers or, more often, round bruises that match the tips of the fingers and the pads of the thumb. These are typically found on the sides of the victim’s neck, but not always. If the assailant is facing the victim, he might press his thumbs into the recesses where the carotid arteries lie. In this case, the major bruising may be on either side of the trachea (windpipe), with smaller finger bruises on either side or the back of the victim’s neck.
Our understanding of these anatomical findings date back Sung Tz’u’s forensic book Hsi Yuan Lu, published in 1235. Believed to be the first written statement on using medical knowledge in criminal investigation, it described how to distinguish between strangulation and drowning. These strangulation marks, as well as the fracture of the hyoid bone that often occurs during manual strangulation, were more fully delineated in 1897 by French physician Paul Brouardel (1837–1906) in his book La Pendaison, la strangulation, la suffocation, la submersion. 
In addition to bruising, abrasions can result from the assailant’s fingernails. Since the tips of the fingers are used to grip the victim’s neck, the assailant’s nails can dig into or scratch the victim’s flesh. These nail abrasions often appear as linear scratches or as thin, semicircular marks where the nails dug in.
Figure 8-2: The thyroid cornu and the hyoid bone. These delicate structures are often fractured during manual strangulation, but less often in ligature strangulation and hanging 
In manual strangulation, the victim’s face is typically congested and petechial hemorrhages are commonly petechial hemorrhages are commonly seen. Since most assailants use a great deal more force than is necessary, there may also be injury to the neck muscles and the ME will often find bleeding into these muscles at autopsy. Also, the small bones of the neck are often injured. Fractures of the cornu (horn) of the thyroid cartilage (Adam’s apple) and the tiny hyoid bone are frequently seen in manual assaults (see Figure 8-2).
When a suspect is located, it is important to examine him carefully for signs of injury since victims often put up a fight and scratch or bruise the attacker. Such injuries are typically seen on the assailant’s fingers, hands, forearms, and face. If the attack is a rape-strangulation, scratches may be seen along the attacker’s flanks or over his back.
Another form of manual strangulation is the chokehold, which is at times employed by law enforcement to subdue a combative subject. There are two basic types: the bar arm hold and the carotid hold. The purpose of both is to collapse the carotid arteries and render the individual unconscious. In the former, the officer places his forearm across the front of the subject’s throat and, using his other hand, grasps his wrist and pulls back, applying pressure to the neck with his forearm. Sometimes the officer uses his baton rather than his forearm. In the carotid hold, the officer places the crook of his elbow against the center of the subject’s neck and again grasps his wrist and pulls back. This produces a pincher or scissors effect that occludes the two carotid arteries. Unconsciousness and brain damage or death can occur with such holds much more quickly than is often appreciated.
The ME often becomes involved in situations where these holds have been used and a police brutality complaint is filed. If too much force is used, the thyroid cartilage and the hyoid bone may fracture, and bleeding may occur in the strap muscles of the neck. In either a living or deceased subject, the ME must evaluate the injuries and determine their cause.
LIGATURE STRANGULATION 
Ligature strangulation occurs when a constricting band is tightened around the neck. The tightening force is some force other than the victim’s body weight, as occurs in hangings. Most ligature strangulations are homicides, though some are accidental, even suicidal.
Devices used for homicidal ligature strangulations are ropes, wires, electrical cords, and clothing such as neckties, belts, bras, and stockings. If the ligature is soft, such as a towel, bed sheet, or silk scarf, it might not leave visible marks on the neck, and if the device is removed before the victim is found, the ME will have a more difficult time determining the exact cause of death.
If the ligature is thin, such as an electrical cord, a groove or furrow will remain in the tissue of the victim’s neck. This furrow is a deep impression that matches the width of the particular ligature used. With thicker devices like ropes, the groove is wide and shallow and, not uncommonly, there are associated bruises and abrasions. Occasionally, these will reveal the pattern of the ligature used, such as the braid pattern of a rope or the link pattern of a chain.
In ligature strangulation, as with the manual variety, the victim’s face is typically congested and scleral and conjunctival petechial hemorrhages are seen. However, in contrast to manual strangulation, bleeding into the neck muscles and fractures of the thyroid cartilage and the hyoid bone are much less common. This difference is probably due to the thickness of fingers and the diffuse pressure they apply as opposed to the thinner area of compression with a ligature.
Figure 8-3: Ligature strangulation and hanging marks. With ligature strangulation the furrow tends to be horizontal (A), while with hanging, it angles across the neck with the higher end toward the knot (B)  
Even in severely decomposed corpses, the ligature mark may be preserved. The compression of the tissues within the furrow collapses the underlying blood vessels. After death, the bacteria that cause putrefaction tend to migrate through the blood vessels as they disseminate throughout the body. The crushed vessels in the furrow lessen the number of bacteria that reach the area, which in turn slows the putrefaction process within the furrow.
As opposed to hangings, the furrow in ligature strangulations tends to be directed horizontally around the neck (see Figure 8-3A). The reason for this is that whether the assailant is facing the victim or approaching from behind, he will tighten the ligature by pulling laterally on its ends.
At autopsy, it is also important to examine the victim’s hands and nails since strands of the assailant’s hair might be found clutched in the victim’s hand and his blood and tissue might be present beneath the fingernails.
Suicide by ligature strangulation is rare, but not unheard of. Since it takes approximately fifteen seconds or so to lose consciousness, the victim has time to secure the ligature in place by either tying a knot or wrapping the cord around several times. In the latter situation, the overlapping loops secure the ligature in place. Once the victim loses consciousness, he cannot loosen the ligature and death from asphyxia follows.
Accidental ligature strangulation is also rare. It typically occurs when a scarf, tie, or other article of clothing becomes entangled in a piece of machinery or a moving vehicle. Ski lifts, elevators, motorcycles, and cars are often involved. Perhaps the most famous victim of accidental ligature strangulation was Isadora Duncan.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: ISADORA DUNCAN 
Isadora Duncan was born May 27, 1878, in Oakland, California, and became a worldwide icon. Isadora began to experiment with new forms of dance at a very early age, but recognition of her genius did not occur until the family moved to Europe when she was a teenager. As her reputation grew, she became known as the “mother of modern dance” for her bold development of a new system of interpretative dance. She lived a flamboyant lifestyle and dressed the part, developing a fondness for very long scarves that flowed along behind her. This fashion statement led to her death when, on September 14, 1927, in Nice, France, her scarf became entangled in the wheels of a moving automobile, strangling her.
HANGINGS 
As opposed to strangulation, asphyxia in hangings results from a noose or other ligature that is pulled tight by the body’s weight. This means that the victim must be completely or partially suspended. Hangings are almost always suicidal; homicidal hangings, though they do occur, are rare. Accidental hangings are uncommon and most often involve children who become entangled in a rope or clothing and find themselves in a position of complete or partial suspension.
Though the airway can be compressed and breathing can be interrupted, the real cause of death in most hangings is compression of the carotid arteries. Except for judicial (legally directed) hangings, fractures of the cervical vertebrae (spinal bones of the neck) are uncommon.
Judicial Hangings 
Though there are seven cervical vertebrae, the one that is typically fractured in a judicial hanging is the second cervical vertebra, called C-2 (also called the axis). The first (C-1—also called the atlas) is melded with the base of the skull, so the C-2 vertebra takes the brunt of the force of the fall (see Figure 8-4). In fact, a fracture of C-2, regardless of its cause, is called the “hangman’s fracture.” Death is usually immediate, even though it may take fifteen minutes or so for the heart to stop. These fractures require that the body drop a sufficient distance, which is very unusual in suicidal hangings.
Figure 8-4: Hangman’s fracture. A fracture of the second cervical vertebra (C-2), which occurs during judicial hangings, is called the “hangman’s fracture.” 
How far does the drop need to be to fracture the cervical bones? Several factors come into play here. Obese persons and those with little neck musculature or who have arthritis of the cervical spine may suffer neck fractures quite easily. The opposite is true for muscular, thick-necked persons. In judicial hangings, these factors are considered in gauging the distance of the drop. Too little drop and the condemned person strangles to death, too far and he could be decapitated.
Suicidal and Homicidal Hangings 
In suicidal hangings, the victim typically makes a noose with whatever is handy. Ropes, belts, bed sheets, clothing, and electrical cords are common. In jails, bed sheets and clothing are common.
It might seem obvious that if the victim’s hands are bound, someone else must have facilitated the hanging. This would point to homicide or at least that someone aided in the suicide. However, this is simply not the case. Suicide victims frequently bind their own hands to prevent a change of heart. Otherwise, they might attempt to loosen or undo the noose, which would leave scratches and gouges of the flesh near the ligature.
If the victim’s hands are bound, the ME should closely examine the knots of these restraints. What if the knots are such that the victim could not have tied them himself? This means that someone else did and would lead to a stronger consideration of homicide, or at least an assisted suicide.
The ME might bring in a forensic knot specialist to offer an opinion. This is an individual with specialized knowledge of ligatures and knots who might be able to determine whether the knot was self-tied. He might also be able to characterize the knot in such a way as to narrow the suspect list.
People tie knots based on their knowledge, skill, and habits. Certain knots may indicate certain professions or hobbies. For example, knots used in nautical situations are very different from those used on a farm or cattle ranch and would vary widely from the common “bow” or “granny” knot the average person uses on packages.
In addition, if the binding ligature is of unusual manufacture, this might offer useful leads. Or, if the ends have been cut, the cut ends might provide valuable tool mark evidence (see Chapter Fourteen).
Autopsy Findings in Hanging Deaths 
The neck markings seen after hanging depend mainly on the nature of the noose used. Soft nooses such as sheets may leave little or no markings, and if the victim is discovered fairly quickly and cut down, the ME may not be able to find any marks at all. Similar to ligature strangulations, a rope or cord may leave a very deep and distinct furrow in the victim’s neck. The longer the body hangs, the deeper the furrow. Abrasions and contusions are also common with these types of nooses. Occasionally, the furrow and any associated bruising may reveal the braid pattern of a rope or the link configuration of a chain. Because the noose compresses the flesh in the furrow so severely and basically “squeezes” out any blood in the area, the furrow may appear pale yellow. With time it will darken to a brownish color.
The furrow found in hanging victims follows an inverted V course and tends to be diagonal across the neck with its high end where the knot is located (see Figure 8-3B). This means that if the knot is to the victim’s left side, the furrow will be lower on the neck and much deeper on the right side and will angle upward toward the left ear. Near the knot, the furrow typically shallows and disappears. This pattern is due to the body hanging by the bottom of the noose. This differs from that found in ligature strangulation, where it is typically horizontal.
If found several hours after the hanging, the victim’s face may be pale and his tongue may be dark purple and protrude from his mouth. If lividity has appeared, it will be in the dependent areas, which in this situation would be the legs, forearms, and hands.
At autopsy, the ME will not usually find facial congestion or petechial hemorrhages that are common in manual and ligature strangulations. Nor is he likely to find bleeding into the neck muscles or fractures of the thyroid cartilage or the hyoid bone. In a suicidal hanging where the victim did not tie his own hands, the ME might see abrasions and claw marks on the neck. However, he would not expect to see any other trauma to the body, and if he did, he might consider homicide as the manner of death. For example, if he found bruises that suggest that the victim had been beaten or restrained before the hanging, homicide becomes a more likely possibility. This is not universally the case, however. The victim may have harmed himself prior to the suicide or he may have thrashed around as he strangled on the rope and bruised himself against walls or furniture.
Another factor to consider is that the victim could have been subdued with drugs or alcohol and then hanged. This might be an attempt to stage the death to look like a suicide (see Chapter Two: Evidence, “The Staged Crime Scene”). For this reason, a toxicological analysis should be performed on all victims of hanging. Clouding the issue is the fact that the victim may have taken alcohol or drugs in order to “get the courage” to do himself in. Here the ME might be able to determine if the level of drugs and alcohol found in the victim were enough to “knock him out” or merely enough to impair his judgment. The point is that if the victim had enough drugs in his system to render him unconscious, he could not have hanged himself (see Chapter Eleven).
The ME examines the rope or ligature in place around the neck after it is removed from the victim. The nature of the ligature used and the type of knot employed could be valuable information, particularly if homicide is considered. As with the restraining ligatures mentioned previously, a forensic knot expert may be brought to the case.
Autoerotic Asphyxia 
Autoerotic or sexual asphyxia is a special type of asphyxia. The mechanism involved in such asphyxias are typically either smothering or strangulation. The victims are most often males involved in some masturbation ritual. Occasionally, sexual asphyxiation is part of partner sexual activities.
The concept is that partial asphyxia somehow accentuates sexual enjoyment. One of the first symptoms of cerebral hypoxia (low oxygen in the brain) is giddiness; this sensation is believed to accentuate sexual arousal. It is also a very dangerous game.
The most common method employed is hanging, but non-hanging ligatures and plastic bags are also used. The victim rigs up a situation where the rope or chosen ligature compresses the neck “on demand.” It may be an elaborate setup or something as simple as leaning one way or the other. This often involves some form of “self-rescue device.” The victim may be able to move a certain way to relieve pressure or may have an instrument for cutting a ligature or slicing open a bag.
Unfortunately, miscalculations can lead to tragedy. Cerebral hypoxia can result in poor judgment, poor assessment of the level of hypoxia, and sudden loss of consciousness. Once unconscious, the victim is unable to save himself. In partner sex, a miscalculation by one can lead to the death of the other.
Sometimes, the ritual involves the inhalation of various gases that lead to hypoxia and other physiological derangements. For example, nitrous oxide and amyl nitrate, both not uncommonly used in sex play, can cause a sudden and profound drop in blood pressure, which can lead to loss of consciousness and death. When coupled with partial asphyxia, these inhaled gases can be particularly treacherous.
The typical scene is a male victim, partially suspended by a hanging noose. He may be wearing female clothing or be surrounded by erotic magazines, photos, or paraphernalia. At times, his hands will be bound, which may bring up the possibility of a homicide staged to look like an accidental death. But, such binding may be part of the ritual. As with other types of hanging deaths, an examination of the bindings may reveal whether the victim could have bound himself or not.
TOXIC GASES  
As opposed to what we saw with suffocating gases, which simply replace oxygen in the breathed air, toxic gases interact with the blood or tissues of the body in a manner that prevents oxygen transport or utilization. Certain toxins interfere with the uptake of oxygen by the blood or its utilization by the cells of the body. The most common chemical asphyxiant gases encountered by the ME are carbon monoxide (CO), hydrogen cyanide (HCN), and hydrogen sulfide (H2S). Deaths due to carbon monoxide may be suicidal, accidental, or homicidal; those due to cyanide are usually suicides; and those involving hydrogen sulfide are typically accidental. We’ll look at each of these toxic substances.
CARBON MONOXIDE 
Deaths from carbon monoxide poisoning are usually suicidal or accidental. It is an uncommon method for homicide, but it has been reported.
Carbon monoxide is stealthy, treacherous, deadly, and common. A family is found dead and the cause is a faulty heater or fireplace. A suicide victim is found in his garage with the car engine running. Campers are found dead in a tent, a kerosene lantern burning in one corner. Each of these is due to carbon monoxide poisoning.
Carbon monoxide is a tasteless, odorless, colorless gas that is completely undetectable by humans. It results from the incomplete combustion of carbon-containing fuels—paper, wood, gasoline, and many other combustible products. Complete combustion of one of these fuels yields carbon dioxide (CO2). If there is a deficiency of oxygen or if the fire is smoldering and doesn’t produce enough heat to drive the reaction to completion, incomplete combustion occurs and the result is the production of carbon monoxide.
Wood, coal, and gas are common carbon-containing fuels. Faulty stoves, heaters, and fireplaces, as well as the exhaust from a car engine, can fill the air with carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide poisoning is a more common cause of death in fires than is the fire itself. Charcoal briquettes are particularly dangerous as they are designed to smolder rather than burst into flame and are also good sources for carbon monoxide. Using a charcoal grill in an enclosed space such as a garage or tent can lead to carbon monoxide buildup very quickly. Faulty butane and propane camp stoves and heaters can also be deadly.
Carbon monoxide’s treachery lies in its great affinity for hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying molecule within our red blood cells (RBCs). When inhaled, CO binds to hemoglobin producing carboxyhemoglobi. It does so three hundred times more readily than does oxygen, and thus it displaces oxygen. The result is that the blood that leaves the lungs and heads toward the body is rich in carbon monoxide (carboxyhemoglobin) and poor in oxygen (oxyhemaglobin). 
This strong affinity of hemoglobin for carbon monoxide means that very high blood levels can occur by breathing air that contains only small amounts of carbon monoxide. For example, breathing air that contains a carbon monoxide level as low as 0.2 percent may lead to blood carbon monoxide saturations greater than 60 percent after only thirty to forty-five minutes. So, a faulty heater or smoldering fire that produces only a small amount of carbon monoxide becomes increasingly deadly with each passing minute.
This powerful attraction for hemoglobin explains how certain individuals succumb to carbon monoxide poisoning in open areas. Most people believe that carbon monoxide is only toxic if it is in an enclosed area, but this is not true. There have been cases of individuals dying while working on their cars in an open area, such as a driveway. Typically the victim is found lying near the car’s exhaust. Similarly, the newly recognized problem of carbon monoxide poisoning in swimmers and water skiers who loiter near a dive platform on the back of a powerboat with an idling engine.
The degree of exposure to carbon monoxide is typically measured by determining the percent of the hemoglobin that is carboxyhemoglobin. The signs and symptoms of carbon monoxide toxicity correlate with these levels. The normal level is 1 to 3 percent, but may be as high as 7 to 10 percent in smokers. At levels of 10 to 20 percent, headache and a poor ability to concentrate on complex tasks occur. Between 30 and 40 percent, headaches become severe and throbbing, and nausea, vomiting, faintness, and lethargy appear. Pulse and breathing rates increase noticeably. Between 40 and 60 percent the victim becomes confused, disoriented, and weak, and displays extremely poor coordination. Above 60 percent, coma and death are likely. These are general ranges since the actual effect of rising carbon monoxide levels varies from person to person.
In the elderly and those with heart or lung disease, levels as low as 20 percent may be lethal. Victims of car exhaust suicide or those who die from fire in an enclosed room may reach 90 percent.
A running car engine in an enclosed garage is a common method for suicide, but it could also be used for homicide. If the killer subdues the victim by force or by way of intoxication, he could place the victim in his car and let the carbon monoxide actually do him in. When determining the manner of death, the ME looks for evidence of trauma to the victim as well as performs a toxicology screen. Finding trauma, such as evidence of a blow to the head, might change the manner of death from suicide to homicide, but finding drugs may not. Some people use multiple suicide methods to assure success and a drug overdose combined with carbon monoxide inhalation is not rare.
When more than one person is found dead in a house or a car and there is no evidence of trauma, carbon monoxide toxicity is considered. The odds of two or more people dying from natural causes at the same time and the same place are extremely remote.
Carboxyhemoglobin is bright red in color and imparts this hue to the blood. When the ME performs an autopsy and sees bright cherry-red blood, he suspects carbon monoxide poisoning as the cause of death. This finding is not absolutely conclusive since cyanide inhalation or ingestion can also result in bright cherry-red blood and tissues. Also, individuals dying from cold exposure or corpses exposed to very low temperatures may show bright red blood. Livor mortis in these situations may also be red or pink rather than the usual blue-gray color (see Chapter Five: Time of Death, “Livor Mortis”).
At autopsy, the internal organs in victims of carbon monoxide intoxication are also bright red. Interestingly, this color does not fade with embalming or when samples taken by the ME are fixed in formaldehyde as part of the preparation of microscopic slides. At times the presence of carbon monoxide can be found in the blood as long as six months after death.
Individuals who survive carbon monoxide intoxication may have serious long-term health problems. The brain is particularly vulnerable since it is extremely sensitive to lack of oxygen. Symptoms and signs of brain injury can begin immediately or be delayed for several days or weeks. The most common aftereffects include chronic headaches, memory loss, blindness, confusion, disorientation, poor coordination, and hallucinations. The ME may be asked to evaluate a living victim in this situation if the exposure was due to a criminal act or if a civil lawsuit is involved.
HYDROGEN CYANIDE 
In books and movies, cyanide is often used for murder. In real life, this happens rarely. It is more likely to be used for attempted suicide, particularly mass suicides. Accidental poisoning of individuals or groups can occur in industrial settings. Cyanide salts are used in metal electroplating, jewelry making, and X-ray recovery industries. The plastic manufacturing industry uses solvents called nitriles, which contain cyanide. When burned, these nitriles can release hydrogen cyanide gas.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: JIM JONES AND THE PEOPLES TEMPLE 
Christian pastor Jim Jones established his Peoples Temple in the 1960s in Indianapolis, Indiana, where his outlandish claims that he could cure cancer, heart disease, and other maladies, drew criticism. So, in the 1970s he moved his congregation to Northern California, San Francisco, and Los Angeles, where he warned his congregation of the coming end of the world. Suspicions arose about many of Jones’ financial dealings and when an exposé appeared in a California magazine, he moved his followers from the United States to the makeshift town of Jonestown, Guyana.
Rumors of human rights abuses followed, and this attracted the attention of some members of Congress. In 1978, U.S. Congressman Leo Ryan and members of the press visited Jonestown and after talking with many of the Peoples Temple members, several members requested to leave with the Congressman and return to the United States. As they awaited a plane at Port Kaituma Airport, they were ambushed by several of the Temple’s security guards. Congressman Ryan and five others were killed and eleven people were wounded. Fear of retribution led Jones and the Temple leaders to arrange a mass suicide.
Jones fed his congregation a fruit drink laced with cyanide and the sedatives Valium and chloral hydrate. Over 900 people perished, including over 250 children.
Hydrogen cyanide gas is the most deadly form of cyanide. The most common cyanide salts are sodium and potassium cyanide, which are white powders. When ingested, these powders react with the acids in the stomach to produce hydrogen cyanide gas. This is also the agent used in gas chamber executions.
Cyanide is a metabolic poison, which means it poisons the cells of the body. It reacts with the iron in cytochrome oxidase, an enzyme necessary for the cell to be able to use oxygen. This reaction prevents the body’s cells from using oxygen and they begin to die rapidly. It is as if all the oxygen was suddenly removed from the body—it’s still present, but the cells can’t use it.
Since the cells no longer remove oxygen from the blood, the blood remains very well oxygenated (rich in oxyhemoglobin) and thus bright red. Another contributor to this cherry-red color is the reaction of cyanide with the blood’s hemoglobin to produce cyanohemoglobin, a bright red compound. Similar to carbon monoxide poisoning, the blood of victims of cyanide exposure is bright red in color.
At autopsy, if the ME sees bright red blood, a reddish hue to the internal organs, and pinkish lividity, he would suspect the presence of cyanide or carbon monoxide and would test for both. In addition, he might detect the typical bitter almond odor of hydrogen cyanide. That is, if he is capable. Curiously, the ability to detect this odor is genetically determined and about 50 percent of people cannot smell it.
SEWER GAS 
Hydrogen sulfide is a byproduct of fermentation and is often found in sewers and cesspools. The combination of the two toxic gases hydrogen sulfide and carbon monoxide and the suffocating gas methane is called sewer gas. When inhaled or ingested, hydrogen sulfide converts oxyhemoglobin (hemoglobin rich in oxygen) into methemoglobin, which does not release oxygen to the tissues, thus effectively suffocating the cells of the body. Methemoglobin imparts a dark purple color to the blood, which can be seen at autopsy, where the ME is also likely to find high levels of sulfide in the blood of sewer gas victims. These deaths are almost always accidental and occur when the victim enters an area rich in sewer gas.
DROWNING  
Drowning is a form of asphyxia in that the victim dies from lack of oxygen. As the lungs’ bronchial tubes (airways) and alveoli (air sacs) fill with water, the ability to oxygenate the blood is lost. Initially, the victim struggles to breathe, and while doing so forces water into the nasal sinuses. Coughing triggers an inhalation reflex, which pulls even more water into the lungs. With the loss of air supply and the energy consumption in the struggle for survival, the oxygen level in the blood rapidly falls and loss of consciousness occurs in one to two minutes. The heart stops shortly thereafter.
Drowning is almost always accidental, but can be suicidal or homicidal. For the ME, the determination of the manner of death is often difficult. Whether the victim fell, jumped, or was pushed into the water, drowning is drowning. It all looks the same.
Even determining that the victim actually drowned is difficult and is mostly a diagnosis of exclusion. The circumstances of the death are often more important than any autopsy findings. If there is no evidence of trauma or natural disease to explain the death, and if the victim is found in water, the ME may determine that the death was from drowning. The reason for this confusion is that there are few, if any, pathological findings at autopsy that can definitely indicate that the person drowned.
You might think that if the lungs are full of water, the victim must have drowned. Not true. The lungs and airways of any corpse submerged in water for several hours will passively fill with water. For this reason, the ME may not be able to determine if the victim was dead or alive when he entered the water and he can’t say whether the victim drowned.
Further confusing the situation, there are several medical conditions, including heart attacks and certain drug overdoses, that cause pulmonary edema (water-filled lungs). So, if a victim suffered a heart attack and developed severe secondary pulmonary edema before falling into the water, or if he died from a certain type of drug overdose and was dumped into water, the autopsy findings might be similar to those of someone who drowned. For this reason, a complete toxicological analysis should be performed on all suspected drowning victims.
Another confusing circumstance is that as many as 15 percent of deaths by drowning are “dry drownings.” In this situation, the intake of water into the throat causes laryngeal spasm, where the larynx reacts to the water by spasming (constricting or closing). This shuts down the passage of air into the lungs, and the victim asphyxiates. This closing of the airway also prevents water from entering the lungs so that they are dry at autopsy. This may be more common in salt water than in fresh water drowning.
There are a few tricks the ME can use to identify a drowning victim. If the victim is conscious when he enters the water, the struggles to breathe cause a great deal of pressure trauma to the sinuses and the lungs. The ME would expect to find hemorrhaging (bleeding) into the sinuses and airways, as well as debris from the water, which is sucked into the sinuses and lungs with attempted breathing. Such findings suggest that the victim was alive when he went into the water. The finding of plants or rocks from the bottom of the body of water clutched in the victim’s hand would be important. This would be presumptive evidence that he grabbed them during his struggle to survive.
The ME might also find clues to indicate that the victim was conscious before drowning by examination of the bone marrow. This might sound odd at first, but the key is in finding tiny creatures called diatoms within the marrow. Diatoms are tiny single-celled organisms that scurry around in both salt and fresh water. They have silica in their cell walls and are very resistant to degradation. If the victim’s heart is still beating when he enters the water, any diatoms in the inhaled water will pass through the lungs, enter the bloodstream, and be pumped throughout the body, where they tend to collect in the bone marrow. If a microscopic analysis of the marrow reveals diatoms, the victim must have been alive at the time of water entry. This technique may be useful in severely degraded or skeletal remains where no lungs or sinus tissues are available for examination. Unfortunately, diatom testing is not exactly that straightforward and is controversial. Some experts feel that diatoms are an inexact tool for determining if a drowning occurred. Some bodies of water contain no diatoms. Also, they are found in air and soil and even on the clothing of the examiner. This makes contamination of the tested sample a possibility.
The Gettler chloride test is another controversial test available to the ME. Some pathologists believe that testing the chloride content of blood taken from each side of the heart can distinguish fresh water from salt water drowning. If the chloride content in blood from the right side is higher, the drowning was in fresh water. If higher on the left, the drowning took place in salt water. The physiological explanation for this is complex and not universally accepted.
As the victim struggles to survive and sucks water into his sinuses and lungs, he also drags in other things—dirt, gravel, plant materials, sand, and microscopic plants and animals. The medical examiner might employ a forensic chemist, a botanist, or a geologist to help identify and determine the site of origin of these materials. For example, the finding of pine pollen and bits of pine needles within the lungs suggests that the victim drowned in a nearby pine-shaded pond, not the backyard swimming pool. Or the absence of these and the finding of high chlorine levels in the water taken from the victim’s lungs suggests the opposite.
An analysis of the sand in a victim’s mouth might be traceable to a particular beach. It could be the chemical nature of the sand itself or any associated insects or bits of leaves, animal fur, or bird feathers that pinpoint the location of the drowning. This can be extremely important in cases where the body has been moved.
The bottom line is that the determination as to whether a victim drowned or not is often a best-guess situation. The ME may depend more on the circumstances of the death than any autopsy or laboratory findings. 
