---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0010.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["officer", "patrol", "vehicle", "driver", "police", "alcohol", "must", "unit", "radar", "suspect", "speed", "use", "team", "department", "person", "shift", "car", "used", "belt", "often", "also", "two", "one", "normally", "training"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0010html

---


3
3POLICE OFFICERS: THEIR DUTIES AND EQUIPMENTMovies and television have so infused our ideas of law enforcement, giving us, again and again, this well-worn image of the archetypal, nightstick-swinging patrol officer on the beat. It is a big challenge for crime writers and readers to untangle fact from this cultural fantasy and reach something approximating (to paraphrase Raymond Chandler) the “tangled woof of fact”: the actual day-to-day experience of frontline officers.— MEGAN ABBOTT, AUTHOR OF DIE A LITTLE, THE SONG IS YOU, AND QUEENPINThe business of solving crimes and protecting the lives and property of American citizens is the responsibility of law enforcement. Each law enforcement agency is comprised of various divisions that function according to the individual needs of the agency's jurisdiction.The front line of defense against criminal activity is a division of police officers called patrol officers, who are the first responders to accidents and criminal activity. Before patrol officers can respond to a crime, they must first learn of its occurrence. Officers receive the majority of their information and direction via police radio, which is normally transmitted to them by police dispatchers. A dispatcher's job begins with the ring of a 911 call — the first step in solving a crime.POLICE DISPATCHERSGood communication is the key to a well-run police department. Officers can't respond to calls and complaints if they don't know where to go or what to expect when they get there. It's the duty of the police dispatcher to maintain the 911 emergency terminals, answering the flood of calls from citizens. It's the dispatcher's job to obtain enough information so he can direct patrol officers and other emergency-response personnel to the scene of a crime or other emergency, such as an automobile or industrial accident or a health-related problem.Calls pour into police station communications centers, sometimes at a rapid-fire pace. The dispatcher must sort through the caller's information — information that's often provided by callers who are irate, angry, frightened, irrational, upset, and hysterical — to determine the nature of the emergency. She must then decide what type of response is needed and by whom. Assignments are normally doled out to patrol officers, who are the first responders, on a rotating basis.Dispatchers receive training and certifications in all phases within the scope of their job assignments. Most dispatchers attend specialized training at a police academy; however, some states allow dispatcher training and testing to be completed online.Dispatchers are also responsible for submitting data for entry in the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) regarding wanted persons, missing persons, stolen property, emergency broadcasts, and criminal histories.NCIC is a computer database maintained by the Federal Bureau of Investigation at their Criminal Justice Information Services Division in Clarksburg, West Virginia. It's accessible only by law enforcement agencies and is open for business around the clock, 365 days a year.The NCIC system occasionally goes offline for maintenance, file upgrades, and purging. Downtime is brief and normally scheduled during the wee hours of the morning when officers are least likely to need instant access to information. However, many officers working the graveyard shifts during these downtimes — especially the Sunday night/Monday morning shift — often run into the problem of stopping a car for a minor traffic infraction and having no way to verify if the vehicle is stolen or if the driver of the car is wanted. Situations such as this can be highly dangerous for officers who are left without the necessary information.The NCIC database contains information about wanted persons and stolen vehicles as well as information regarding missing persons, violent offenders, gang member identification, terrorists, embezzled or counterfeit securities, foreign fugitives, criminal histories, stolen firearms and other property, and descriptions of unidentified homicide victims.PATROL OFFICERSPatrol officers are the police officers with whom people are most familiar. They wear the uniform of their departments and display the badges and patches of their city, county, or state. They're the backbone of every police department, and they're the front-line defense against crime. These officers protect citizens and their property from criminal activity. Patrol officers must be constantly alert to all suspicious activity; they must be ever-vigilant for crimes-in-progress, and they must be the first responders to crime and accident scenes. Their jobs aren't easy.Officers assigned to a patrol division or patrol units, whichever name is designated by an individual department, conduct their day-to-day business from the front seat of a patrol vehicle, a bicycle, a horse, a motorcycle, or on foot as beat officers. Their responsibility is twofold. To ensure the best use of manpower, police departments usually divide their patrol officers into two distinct divisions: routine patrol (criminal apprehension and pre-vention) and traffic.It's the duty of the routine patrol division to proactively prevent crime from occurring through methods such as patrol, community policing, and surveillance. They must also react to crimes as they occur by responding to citizen complaints and through their own observations.A traffic division is responsible for motor vehicle law enforcement and for the prevention of and investigation into all traffic accidents. The traffic division is also in charge of DUI/DWI offense enforcement and prevention.Each division makes use of any specialized equipment, tools, and training that's available to them, such as bicycle patrol, mounted patrol, and motorcycle patrol.Some larger police departments assign two patrol officers per vehicle. Smaller departments simply don't have the manpower to do so, and officers must rely on experience, know-how, and a quick response to calls for assistance to keep them safe. Depending on individual department policy, partner assignments may or may not be permanent. In fact, the assignment may be doled out on a day-to-day basis by the shift supervisor.SHIFT ASSIGNMENTSPatrol officers normally work eight-hour shifts. Those shifts divide the working day into three segments: 8:00 A.M. until 4:00 P.M., 4:00 P.M. until 12:00 A.M., and 12:00 A.M. until 8:00 A.M. Each department sets its own shift hours, and each of those individual shifts is a world all its own. The types of calls answered by officers during the 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. shift are different than those answered by the 4:00 P.M., or second-shift, officers; and the midnight, or graveyard shift, calls are even more diverse than those on either of the other two shifts.Day-shift patrol officers resolve more issues related to nonviolent crime, such as fraud and bad-check writing, than the other shifts. Second-shift patrol officers answer the most crime-in-progress calls such as burglary and robbery. Graveyard shift patrol officers work the most violent crime cases, such as rape, homicide, and assaults. It's been my experience that the majority of serious crime occurs between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 2:00 A.M. To effectively thwart crime during this time frame, some departments have added a fourth shift from the hours of 8:00 P.M. until 4:00 A.M. This extra shift doubles the manpower on the street during the time when criminal activity is at its highest.Shift assignments are normally based on seniority. The newest, or rookie, patrol officers are assigned to the midnight shift; those with more years of service work the second shifts, and the senior patrol officers are given the opportunity to work the day shift. Not all patrol officers want to work during day-shift hours. There's a general consensus among patrol officers that they encounter as much, if not more, stress from their superiors as they do from criminals; therefore, some officers prefer to stay away from the 8:00 A.M. shift when the ranking day-shift patrol officers, the mayor, and city council members are out and about observing the day-to-day operations. Each shift is supervised by either a sergeant or lieutenant.OFFICER APPARELUniformed patrol officers must wear protective clothing and gear, such as bullet-resistant vests, which can weigh between five and ten pounds. The protective clothing is often uncomfortably warm because of the clay-like density of the bullet-resistant vests worn beneath their outer garments. The vests are secured tightly around their torsos with wide Velcro straps. When the officer sits, any extra body fat or skin around his waistline is almost always pinched between the semi-rigid bottom of the vest and the top of the sturdy, leather gun belt.The front and rear panels of a bullet-resistant vest.Fire-retardant shirts and pants made from thicker-than-normal material can scratch an officer's skin, and their shiny, black or brown patent leather shoes make it nearly impossible to chase a suspect who's fleeing on foot. Some departments have relaxed their strict military-type dress codes and are allowing officers to wear more practical footwear, such as walking or running shoes.Shirts worn by uniformed patrol officers sometimes have military creases sewn into the front and back. The shirts have a built-in stain-resistant finish and a special badge tab, and the shoulders are adorned with epaulets that are sometimes used to display the pins that signify the officer's rank. Shirts are available with either button-up or zippered fronts. The zippered front permits the officer to remain neat and tidy even at the end of a scuffle. Neckties are the clip-on type to prevent an officer from being choked by suspects.Most departments have set times of the year when particular clothing is required. Long-sleeved winter shirts and ties are worn during the winter months, and it's only on a predetermined day that officers are allowed to switch to cooler short-sleeved summer shirts. An early spring or summer can provide very uncomfortable working conditions for an officer wearing thick, long-sleeved shirts in combination with an already hot bullet-resistant vest.Coats, jackets, and raincoats are equipped with side zippers that allow the officer easy access to her sidearms and other accessories.TOOLS OF THE TRADEPatrol officers carry an assortment of items on their belts that assist them in the performance of their duties. The weight of the equipment can easily exceed ten pounds and, in many cases, tops fifteen.• Sam Browne belt. The Sam Browne gun belt worn by patrol officers derived its name from General Sir Sam Browne of the British Army in India. General Browne designed the heavy leather belt in the late 1800s or early 1900s to help carry the weight of the heavy pistols and sabers used by the soldiers of the day. A shoulder strap was added to the belt to assist with carrying the load.Today's patrol officers carry much more weight on their belts, but they no longer need the shoulder straps to hold up the added weight. Instead, thin, four-inch-long leather or nylon straps, called belt keepers, circle around both the Sam Browne belt and the regular dress belt that's worn through the belt loops of the officer's pants. The belt keepers snap into place firmly and hold the gun belt around the waist. Without belt keepers, gravity would quite easily pull the Sam Browne belt, along with all its attachments, to the officer's knees.The Sam Browne belt is made from thick leather or nylon and is approximately two and one-quarter inches wide. The buckle is removable so its wearer can slide on attachments. The leather belt can be ordered in either a basket-weave pattern, as shown here, or in a smooth black or brown finish.Some police departments are replacing leather gear with nylon because nylon is much lighter. In addition, nylon tends to repel contaminates, such as body fluids.Sam Browne belt.• Pepper spray and case. The chemical spray used by patrol officers is oleoresin capsicum (O.C. spray), more commonly called mace. Mace is actually a company brand name assigned to a number of police-related supplies and equipment. Mace products are so widely used by patrol officers that the name has become a nickname for all chemical sprays.Oleoresin capsicum, or pepper spray, is made from peppers in the chili-pepper family, such as jalapeños and habaneras. Capsicum, an alkaloid, is extracted from the vegetable's stem just above the seeds. This alkaloid produces the “heat” in pepper sprays.Pepper sprays have become a very popular nonlethal tool for patrol officers. The spray is used in situations where there's a probability of the officer becoming injured by a violent suspect, or when a suspect is resisting arrest. When sprayed, a violent suspect is normally incapacitated for a few minutes, which allows the officer to effectively apply restraints.• Semiautomatic pistol and security holster. Modern-day police arm themselves with semiautomatic pistols, which are capable of storing and firing multiple rounds of ammunition. Most semiautomatics carried by patrol officers hold a total of fifteen or sixteen rounds. Patrol officers wear security holsters to prevent a prisoner or criminal from removing their weapons during a scuffle or escape attempt. Officers must perform a series of actions to take their guns out of the holsters. This secret sequence is known only to the wearer of the holster.• Magazines (clips) and magazine holders. Patrol officers must carry spare ammunition with them at all times in case they get involved in a gun battle with criminals. Officers who carry semiautomatic handguns carry their extra ammunition in preloaded carry their extra ammunition in preloaded magazines. Each magazine holds multiple rounds. The double magazine pictured below holds two magazines and allows easy access by its wearer. The officer normally wears the holder on the front of her gun belt..40 caliber semi-automatic pistol and security holster.Double magazine holder and magazines. The magazines shown hold a total of fifteen rounds of ammunition.• Speed loaders (six rounds each). Speed loaders were designed to assist with the loading of six-shot revolvers. Each speed loader holds six rounds of ammunition. Bullets for the revolvers are placed and clipped into the loader in slots that correspond with the bullet chambers of a revolver's cylinder. Once the bullets are in place, a twist of a tiny, knurled knob releases the rounds, enabling the shooter to load all six bullets in a single motion.Speed loaderSpeed-loader pouches are designed to carry two fully loaded speed loaders. The double pouches are normally carried on the front of the Sam Browne belt for easy access by officers.• Flashlight. Flashlights are a must-have tool for all patrol officers. They come in all shapes and sizes and are made from either metal or heavy plastic. Some patrol cars are equipped with rechargeable flash-lights, assuring the officers of a flashlight that's ready for use at all times.Patrol officers have sometimes used metal flashlights as weapons. To eliminate the possibility of inflicting severe harm on suspects, some departments require their officers to use only plastic flashlights. Some police academies have training sessions on how to use flashlights as weapons, while others forbid their use for that purpose.Flashlights are worn on a belt ring located on the opposite side from the officer's service weapon (handgun). Officers are taught to hold flashlights away from their bodies to prevent criminals from using the light source as a target during a nighttime gun battle.• Mini-flashlight. Patrol officers carry mini-flashlights as a spare source of light, in the event their main flashlight becomes inoperable or broken. Pressure-point tactics allow mini-flashlights to be used on a suspect's fingers, wrists, chests, ankles, nose, and ear lobes as pain-compliance and distraction devices. Officers are taught how to use these techniques during their police academy training.• PR-24 or side-handle baton. A PR-24 is a restraint-and-control device that can be used as both an offensive and defensive weapon. The side-handle baton's main use is to allow an officer to gain control of a suspect by using leverage combined with takedown maneuvers.Striking a suspect with a PR-24 isn't generally permitted by police agencies because of the severe amount of force that can be delivered while executing any of the various techniques. Officers are trained to use striking techniques only in life-or-death situations or where there's a possibility of serious bodily harm to the officer or an innocent person. The baton is made from a high-density plastic called polycarbonate, and it can withstand five thousand pounds of force. An officer must attend training and be certified to carry and use a PR-24.PR-24 or side-handle baton.• Portable radio and holder. Communication equipment is a must for all patrol officers. Handheld portable radios are part of a police officer's arsenal. Today's portable radios can reach far greater distances than the old two-way walkie-talkies. Police departments use a series of communications towers equipped with “repeaters” that relay, or repeat, radio signals. The signals are first sent from the portable unit to a trunk-mounted repeater located in the patrol car. The transmissions are then relayed from the car's repeater to a tower, where the message is repeated from one tower to another until it reaches its destination. This process is completed instantly, without delay. Some portable radios are equipped with a panic button. A wounded officer can simply depress the button to summon aid. His location is identified on an electronic map using global positioning technology.• Taser. Tasers are a nonlethal alternative for use by officers attempting to subdue violent suspects. The device fires two barbed probes capable of delivering eighteen to twenty-six watts of electricity (fifty thousand volts). The probes can penetrate up to two inches of clothing. Each unit is powered by a combination of several AA batteries and two compressed-air cartridges containing 1800 pounds per square inch (PSI) of compressed nitrogen or carbon dioxide. Two types of cartridges are available, which allow the device to propel the probes at distances of either fifteen or twenty-one feet.Tasers are designed to override the central nervous system of a disorderly suspect by delivering electricity directly to the skeletal muscles. Those muscles contract until the target suspect can no longer stand. In fact, the suspect usually ends up lying on the ground in a fetal position.Tasers are effective against suspects who are under the influence of drugs such as PCP, and, unlike lethal weapons, the takedown capability of Tasers remains the same no matter where the probes contact the body.Taser.There's been some recent controversy regarding Taser use by patrol officers. Some say officers are too quick to use the devices, and several deaths have been thought to be directly related to Taser use. These incidents are rare and are currently under investigation. Most police departments, police instructors, and the weapons' manufacturers still insist that the Taser is a safe and effective tool for use by police departments.• Handcuffs. Handcuffs have been around in various forms for hundreds of years. Before the mid-1800s handcuffs were only available in one size. The universal cuffs were simple metal rings that looped around an offender's wrists and locked at the point where the loops joined. These one-size-fits-all handcuffs were very uncomfortable for large people and they allowed slender people an excellent opportunity to escape custody.In 1862, a man named W.V. Adams saw the need to make handcuffs adjustable and designed a ratchet locking system that could accommodate wrists of all sizes. The first patent for handcuffs was issued to Adams and his partner, Orson Phelps, in 1874.The two most popular handcuff styles used by law enforcement are the chain link and the hinged. Both are made from carbon steel and can withstand a pulling pressure of more than one thousand pounds.Chain-link and hinged handcuffs, leg irons, waist chain.Chain-link handcuffs are the most widely used by street cops because the single connecting chain allows for the easiest application. Hinged cuffs are somewhat difficult to apply during a struggle because of their lack of flexibility. They're more widely used in transporting felons from jails, prisons, and lockups. The hinge that separates the two cuffs greatly restricts the movement of a suspect's hands.Both styles of handcuffs feature two locking systems. One is the familiar ratchet lock (two sets of interlocking teeth) that automatically catches when the cuffs are placed around a wrist. The second is a push-pin lock that serves as a safety, locking the ratchet in place and preventing the handcuffs from tightening further.Handcuff Keys• Handcuff keys. Handcuff keys come in all kinds of shapes and sizes. The L-shaped end of the key is inserted into the keyhole to release the locking devices. The pin protruding from the opposite end of the key activates the small push-pin lock located on the handcuffs.To unlock handcuffs that have been double-locked with both the ratchet lock and the pushpin lock, the officer inserts the L-shaped portion of the key into the keyhole and turns it to the left, ninety degrees. This action releases the ratchet. The officer must then rotate the key in the opposite direction a full 180 degrees to release the push-pin lock. Simply put, the officer turns the key first to the left as far as it will go, then back to the right as far as it will go.• Handcuff case. Handcuff cases are designed to hold either one or two pairs of chain-link and/or hinged cuffs and are usually worn on the rear of the gun belt — in the center — to allow for access with either hand.PATROL VEHICLESOfficers rely on many tools in the performance of their duties, and one of the most important tools at their disposal is the patrol vehicle. The majority of a patrol officer's time is spent behind the steering wheel of this car. The patrol vehicle isn't just a means of transportation — it also serves as the officer's mobile office, a storage area for equipment, a safe haven from dangerous situations, and an observation post to watch for criminal activity.The brand of vehicle used by police departments is determined by a bidding process. The manufacturer that can meet the production specifications and departmental demands with the lowest price will normally receive the contract.A patrol vehicle isn't all that different from a normal passenger car. Patrol vehicles are regular cars that have been equipped with a “police package” that's comprised of heavy-duty suspension, brakes, tires, cooling system, and transmission. The engines are usually the same engines that are installed in an average high-performance car.Patrol vehicles are also modified to accommodate the extra wiring requirements of lights, antennas, and sirens. They can also be equipped with rear-door and window locks that can only be operated by the driver. Patrol vehicles assigned to canine officers are often equipped with rear doors that lock and unlock and open and close via remote control. This feature allows the officer to release her dog from a distance should she need assistance with apprehending a suspect or controlling a dangerous situation.Other equipment such as push bumpers, hidden lighting, radio equipment, computer terminals, shotgun mounting brackets, weapon lockboxes, light bars, radar equipment, sirens, and camera equipment is often installed by the department's vehicle maintenance technicians or motor-pool mechanics.Screens made from a combination of steel mesh, aluminum, and Plexiglas separate the rear passenger compartment of patrol vehicles from the front driver's seat. The heavy screens provide a secure area in the rear compartment for the transporting of prisoners. The compartment also provides safety for both the driver and the prisoner. Before the safety screens were available an extra officer had to ride in the back seat to prevent the prisoner from interfering with the driver and to prevent offenders from harming themselves.Older patrol officers often reflect on the days when the screens were fabricated from welded-wire mesh, much like grates over storm drains. These old-timers frequently used the dog-in-the-road trick to bring unruly prisoners under control. The driver would slam on the brakes saying, “Did you see that dog?” The handcuffed prisoner's unprotected face would smash into the steel barrier. Any disruptive behavior ceased immediately. The dog-in-the-road trick was much more effective when it was implemented in a paddy wagon or a transport van, in which the traditional seats had been removed and replaced with smooth, wooden benches. Not only was the metal screen a hazard, but prisoners were often tossed and rolled about in the back of the van. Needless to say, this practice is dangerous, cruel, and illegal.The interiors of patrol vehicles are equipped with oversized, extra-bright, overhead dome lights. These provide proper lighting for officers when they're completing reports and filling in the blanks on a traffic summons. Officers activate these lights with a switch on the light itself that operates independently from the normal on-off switch in the door frame. For the safety of the patrol officers, the lights that normally come on when car doors open are often disconnected in patrol vehicles. These lights can illuminate officers at inopportune moments, making them targets for criminals.Officers use toggle-type rocker switches to operate the various strobe lights and rotating beacons mounted in the roof light bars, rear windows, dashboards, front grill, headlights, taillights, and any other place of possible concealment.TRAFFIC DIVISIONPatrol officers who work in the traffic division are responsible for the enforcement of motor vehicle laws. These officers work radar and DUI/DWI enforcement and investigate traffic accidents. Their primary duty, through the enforcement of traffic codes and laws, is to reduce the number of accidents on the roadways of their jurisdictions. They're also responsible for a great deal of extra municipal income from the fines they collect for various infractions of the law.Traffic fines can increase a city or county's revenue by millions of dollars. The lure of that much extra money has some departments paying patrol officers a higher rate of pay during their off-hours to catch speeding motorists. Many communities have become known nationwide as speed traps due to their very aggressive speed enforcement.Radar is an acronym for radio detection and ranging. The radar devices most often used by patrol officers — Doppler radar units — emit a continuous frequency and then receive that frequency's echo after it has reflected from the target vehicle (the speeder). Doppler radar units are capable of determining the speed of moving vehicles while the patrol vehicle is sitting still (stationary radar) and while it's in motion (moving radar).In stationary radar, the radar unit instantly calculates the difference between the two frequencies. That variation is then converted into miles per hour — the target vehicle's traveling speed.In moving radar, the unit must process more than one reflected signal. To do so, it first determines the patrol vehicle's rate of speed. This is accomplished by the radar unit transmitting a signal that reflects from the roadway surface and the surrounding landscape. The signal is reflected back to the unit's antenna where it's converted into the patrol vehicle's miles per hour. That speed is displayed as patrol speed on a small digital screen on the front of the radar unit. Simultaneously, the radar unit sends another signal that reflects from oncoming or receding vehicles. These signals are reflected back to the unit. The two speeds are combined by the unit, which then calculates the difference between the patrol vehicle and the speeding car. The speed of the target automobile is then displayed in the target window on the face of the radar unit.Radar units display both the target vehicle's speed and the speed of the officer's patrol vehicle.If the patrol vehicle and the target vehicle are moving toward one another at identical speeds, no speed displays in either the patrol speed or target windows. Since moving radar is based on the patrol vehicle's speed, all patrol vehicle speedometers used for radar operation must be regularly calibrated for accuracy.Radar units can pick up a vehicle's speed at distances as close as one hundred feet and as far away as one mile. Smoke, dust, and moisture don't affect the accuracy of the units, only their range.Patrol officers who operate radar units are required to successfully complete and pass a basic radar operator's training course. The course is normally a forty-hour class with instruction on motor vehicle law regarding speed and the proper operation of various types of radar units.Officers are required to calibrate each radar unit at the beginning and end of their shifts. To do so, they strike a tuning fork that's designed to simulate a vehicle's speed, such as sixty miles per hour. Then they hold the vibrating tuning fork in front of the unit's antenna (the part we see mounted on the outside of the patrol vehicle or the handheld radar gun). The tuning fork's frequency is received by the antenna and is converted into traveling speed. A reading of sixty miles per hour should be displayed on the unit's dash-mounted digital readout. A second tuning fork is struck, simulating thirty-five miles per hour, and the same procedure is followed. If the machine accurately displays both speeds, it's deemed to be operating appropriately.Patrol officers aren't required to show the digital readout to speeders. Most states require patrol officers who are working radar to be in full uniform, and they must display their badges of authority in plain view.Laser radar unit.Laser radar operates on a much simpler principle than Doppler radar. It simply emits a short burst of infrared light, and the light travels to the targeted vehicle where it's reflected back to the radar unit. The laser unit then calculates how long, in nanoseconds, the light took to travel to and from the speeding car.Laser radar is accurate and easy for officers to use. They simply point the device at a car that's suspected of speeding and then pull a trigger that operates like the trigger on a pistol. Almost instantly the car's speed and its distance from the officer are displayed numerically on a digital readout on the rear of the unit. Laser radar units are a bit more expensive than other radar devices, but their accuracy and ease of use often justify the price.DUI/DWI ENFORCEMENTDUI/DWI (driving under the influence or driving while intoxicated, depending on the state) is a criminal offense — a misdemeanor that can carry a penalty of up to one year in jail with the possibility of accompanying fines. A DUI/DWI conviction can result in the loss of driving privileges, and the offender's driver's license may be revoked.In most states, it's presumed that a person is legally intoxicated when his blood-alcohol concentration (BAC) is 0.08, meaning when the ratio of alcohol in his bloodstream is 0.08 grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood.A person's level of intoxication can be amplified by synergism, the multiplicative effect of combining alcohol and drugs. Genetics and a person's chronic use of alcohol can also alter the effects of alcohol.Once alcohol is consumed, nothing can remove it from the person's system except time and normal digestion, metabolism, evaporation, and excretion. The metabolism (the body's means of converting food into energy) of alcohol begins immediately after consumption. Typically the body metabolizes approximately .015 of blood alcohol per hour; therefore, someone who has a BAC of .15 after his last drink will have no measurable alcohol in his body after ten hours.The level of alcohol in a body can be measured as soon as forty to seventy minutes after the person has consumed one drink. Excretion of alcohol through urine begins in about forty to fifty minutes after the drink has been consumed. The body breaks down approximately 90 percent of alcohol in the liver and 1 to 3 percent of alcohol through the elimination of urine; a scant 0.5percent is eliminated through sweat and tears. The rest is released by evaporation through breathing.People try many things when attempting to fool the police and the machines they use to measure a suspect's BAC. They place copper pennies in their mouths, chew gum, eat candy, and spit. They even try eating raw onions. None of these methods are effective. Coffee won't make someone sober; it only increases the drinker's need to use the restroom.Patrol officers are trained observers, and they're not easily deceived when driving behind a drunk driver. They're taught to be aware of certain signs that show a person is driving while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs. Some of the indicators of a drunk driver include:crossing the center lineweaving within the travel laneexcessive brakingfailing to dim headlights when meeting oncoming carsdriving somewhere other than a designated roadwaystraddling the center linestopping in the middle of the roadway for no apparent reasonalmost striking other cars or stationary objectsdriving with headlights offtraveling above or below the specified speed limitSometimes officers pass a suspect vehicle close enough to see a driver displaying certain physical signs that indicate a drunk driver. An intoxicated driver sometimes grips the steering wheel much too tightly; her gaze is often unwavering and fixed straight ahead; she may sit with her face too close to the windshield as if attempting to see better; and she may even be drinking alcoholic beverages as she drives.When patrol officers initiate a traffic stop, they begin to look for signs of drunk driving. Drivers who are under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol sometimes swerve abruptly from one side of the road to the other when they first notice blue lights flashing behind them. They may not respond to lights and sirens. They sometimes drive for miles before finally realizing a patrol vehicle is behind them. I've been behind a suspected drunk driver who, when I activated my blue lights and siren, instantly slammed on his brakes, causing his car to come to a sudden stop just inches in front of my patrol vehicle. I've also witnessed inebriated drivers hit the curb when they tried to stop; they've driven onto sidewalks, and they've pulled their cars into ditches thinking they were parking on the shoulder of the roadway. They stop and, thinking they're shifting into park, put their car into reverse; then they step out of the car while it moves slowly backward.Erratic driving provides patrol officers ample probable cause to conduct a traffic stop. Once the stop is made, officers begin to look for other telltale signs of a DUI/DWI offense, such as a red, flushed face; slurred speech; the odor of alcoholic beverages coming from the driver's breath or elsewhere inside the car; bloodshot or watery eyes; and difficulty communicating. The odor associated with alcoholic beverages isn't the aroma of the actual alcohol; it's actually the combined scents of additives that are mixed with the beverage during the fermentation process. Toxins that are produced as a result of fermentation also provide their own smells. Pure alcohol is nearly odorless.Drunk drivers may also exhibit difficulty maintaining balance, and they may stumble or sway when they attempt to walk. Inebriated drivers frequently place a hand on top of their cars in an attempt to steady themselves when talking to the officer. They often provide inappropriate or unusual answers to officer's questions.One of my standard questions to ask suspected drunk drivers was, “Have you been drinking any alcoholic beverages?” Surprisingly, many people answered the question truthfully, which is great evidence in a court proceeding. One man in particular was a little too honest for his own good. He looked hurt and appalled that I would ask him such a question. His response, complete with a roll of the eyes accompanied by a condescending, disgusted tone of voice, was, “No sir. I don't drink. That stuff'll kill you. I just smoked a little marijuana and snorted just a wee bit of coke before I left the party.”Drunk drivers also can run the gamut of emotions from being overly cheerful and happy to acting rude and combative. Officers frequently ask suspected drunk drivers how much they've had to drink, and the most common response is, “Two beers (drinks).” I've seen drivers who were barely able to stand due to the extreme amount of alcohol they'd consumed, and their responses were the same.When an officer suspects a driver is under the influence of either alcohol or drugs, he may ask the driver to step outside of the car and perform a series of field sobriety tests, such as standing on one leg for a short period of time or reciting numbers or the alphabet in succession. The officer may ask the driver to walk several steps away from him, pivot, turn, and return to the original spot. Another test is the well-known process of having the driver close his eyes, tilt his head back, and touch the tip of his nose with the tip of his right index finger, then repeat the step with his left hand.Patrol officers who have received the appropriate training have yet another tool in their arsenal against drunk drivers — they're qualified to test for a person's horizontal gaze nystagmus (HGN). Human eyes have a natural ability to track objects moving in any direction. Alcohol consumption slows this ability to track and causes an involuntary jerking of the eyeball called nystagmus. Nystagmus can be horizontal, vertical, rotary, or a combination of either, but it's usually the onset of HGN that's of interest to patrol officers.Alcohol stimulates nerve endings in the eyes, causing nystagmus to become more pronounced in intoxicated people. As the level of alcohol in the body rises, the eyes' reaction to tracking side-to-side movement occurs sooner — the more intoxicated a person is, the less the eyes move to either side before the jerking motion begins.Officers test a suspect's HGN by first verifying that both pupils are of equal size. When the officer's satisfied that both eyes function equally (if not, there may be a medical condition present and the test must be aborted), they hold an object such as a pen approximately twelve to fifteen inches in front of the suspect's nose, keeping the pen's tip slightly above eye level. The suspect is instructed to focus on the tip of the pen, face forward without moving, and follow the movement of the pen with her eyes.The officer then slowly and smoothly moves the ink pen forty-five degrees to the left, then back to the front. He then performs the same movement to the suspect's right side. During the pen's movement, the officer looks at the suspect's eyes, watching as she pursues the progress of the pen. If the suspect has consumed alcohol, her eyes will normally begin to show signs of nystagmus at some point as they move to each side.The officer is looking for three signs of intoxication in each eye — the eye's lack of smooth tracking, obvious nystagmus at the forty-five degree angle (maximum deviation), and the onset of nystagmus prior to the maximum forty-five degree angle. If four or more signs are present, that person is considered to have a BAC of .10 — well above the legal limit of .08. An officer should conduct an HGN test at least three times to provide consistency.These hand-eye coordination, balance, and thought processing tests are designed to provide officers with more evidence toward proving the driver is intoxicated.There are many people who have various illnesses, impairments, or difficulty with the performance of this type of physical testing; therefore, drivers aren't required by law to perform any field sobriety tests. However, most states have implied consent laws, meaning that any person operating a motor vehicle on the roads, streets, and highways of the state must submit to either a breath or blood test when instructed to do so by a patrol officer. Refusal to do so is usually a misdemeanor that carries penalties and fines similar to DUI/DWI offense. A refusal to submit to either a breath or blood test may also result in the revocation or suspension of a driver's license.A holding cell or “drunk tank.” Solid doors with tray slots have replaced bars.The DataMaster, Breathalyzer, and Intoxilyzer 5000 are machines used by police to measure the amount of alcohol in the blood. These machines don't detect alcohol that's in the air or in the suspect's breath; instead, they measure the ratio between the concentration of alcohol in the-blood and the concentration of alcohol in deep lung air. When someone drinks alcohol, the alcohol is dispersed from the bloodstream into tiny air sacs in the lungs called alveoli. It's at this exchange point that the machines calculate the ratio and convert it into the percent of alcohol that's in the tested person's bloodstream. The average ratio of breath alcohol concentration to blood alcohol content is 2100:1.Operators of the breath-testing devices must complete a certification course and must recertify regularly. Officers who haven't attended training may not perform breath testing on a person suspected of a DUI/DWI offense.A DUI/DWI arrest can result in the driver spending at least a few hours in a jail cell. In fact, it's not unusual for the offender to be incarcerated overnight while he waits for a family member or friend to post bail and assume responsibility for him. Magistrates can also order the drunk driver to be held without bail until he's had time to sober up, meaning the alcohol and its side effects have been purged from his system.Holding cells for those who have been arrested for DUI/DWI, or for being intoxicated in public, are usually large cells — often referred to as drunk tanks in TV shows — capable of holding several prisoners at once, and some facilities are reserved just for drunks. The concrete-walled cells are often overcrowded, forcing many inmates to sleep on the floor, on a single mattress coated with hard plastic, or — if mattresses are in short supply — a folded wool blanket. Two-inch-thick pillows made from the same hard plastic are handed out on a first-come, first-serve basis, and drunks are usually last in line to receive pillows. A solitary stainless steel combination sink and toilet is shared by all. It stands in full view of everyone, prisoners and jail employees alike.The constant influx of new arrivals and the release of offenders sometimes prevent proper cleaning and disinfecting of holding cells, and more often than not the cell floors and walls are littered with a concoction of debris, urine, hair, blood, fecal matter, and spilled food. To spend even one minute in a small, dirty jail cell is bad enough, but falling asleep or passing out while drunk and then waking up with a hangover in that same cell makes matters even worse.Hangovers are the result of the body desperately trying to rid itself of toxins by producing enzymes that attempt to purge the poisons. However, when the toxin level reaches a point higher than the body's ability to remove it, the stomach becomes irritated, the person feels sick, and headaches and vomiting can occur.Wall-mounted steel plates serve as “beds.” When all beds are full, prisoners are forced to sleep on the concrete floor.Alcohol is a diuretic, which means it increases the body's urine output. The body is then depleted of water, which further complicates the problem and increases the effects of the hangover.A person who's been convicted for driving under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol faces the possibility of a suspended driver's license, court-ordered rehabilitation, a fine, jail time, and — if his drunk driving resulted in the injury or death of another person — a prison sentence.MOUNTED PATROLPatrol officers assigned to mounted patrols must attend a ten-to-twelve-week training period in addition to their basic academy training. After their training, they conduct their routine patrols on horseback.Several breeds of horses are used in police work, such as Morgan horses, Arabians, Percheron draft horses, Percheron/Thoroughbred cross horses, and Tennessee Walking horses. Horses chosen for police duty are large (15.2 hands or taller), strong animals with even temperaments. Most departments find it best to use animals between the ages of eight and twelve years old.The horses selected for service can be donated to or purchased by the departments, and they must have a suitable disposition for the work they're required to perform. These animals are often subjected to large crowds of unruly people, gunshots, and having objects thrown at them. It can take special police-equestrian trainers anywhere from four to six months to train a horse to be street-ready.A single toilet/sink combination is shared by all.Officers on horseback are able to patrol areas not normally accessible to vehicles, such as park trails. Mounted police patrols are highly visible and are often used daily as part of regular patrol assignments. They're also very effective for crowd control and special events.Police horses are very well cared for. They're fed twice a day, exercised, given supplemental vitamins, petted, groomed, and checked regularly by veterinarians. A horse and its police officer rider quickly form a bond and become a team.During inclement weather, officers assigned to a mounted patrol detail may be reassigned to a patrol vehicle or other duties as needed.BICYCLE PATROLOfficers selected for bicycle patrol duty must be in excellent physical condition. They spend their eight-hour shifts patrolling areas that are normally not accessible to officers in vehicles, such as walking trails, public bike paths, parks, and areas where special events and public gatherings take place. Bike patrols are not only effective because of their off-road abilities; they're excellent in situations that require a stealthy approach.Bike patrol officers are highly visible, and their presence within the communities they patrol creates safer neighborhoods. They're also able to supply a more personal approach to law enforcement because they're essentially outside — not confined to a vehicle — and can converse with people as they ride through their patrol districts.Bikes used by departments for patrol are often mountain-type, multi-speed bikes made from lightweight aluminum with heavy-duty suspensions. They're equipped with containers for various police equipment and are painted in matte or flat-black finishes for stealth-type patrol or in bright colors for high-visibility community relations and policing.Officers working bicycle patrol normally have a patrol vehicle assigned to them as well. The patrol vehicles are equipped with bicycle mounting racks, which allow officers to transport their bikes from one location to another.SWATSpecial weapons and tactics, or SWAT, units are specially trained teams of police officers (both patrol officers and detectives) who respond to particularly dangerous situations. SWAT teams are equipped with high-tech weapons and equipment, such as machine guns, concussion grenades (flash-bangs), high-powered rifles used by SWAT snipers, and night-vision scopes and goggles. Some SWAT units are equipped with armored vehicles and aircraft.These highly skilled officers are combat trained, much like the military. They undergo rigorous physical training and are required to maintain a regular physical fitness program. SWAT officers must be extremely proficient in their use of firearms and hand-to-hand combat.SWAT team membership begins with an officer's application to the unit. The application must be accompanied by a letter of interest stating why the officer wants to join the SWAT team. A letter of recommendation from the officer's supervisor must also be provided to the SWAT team commander.Officers who are selected as members of the team must be proficient with firearms. They must regularly shoot an average score of 80 to 90 percent during their first year as a SWAT team member. Each year thereafter, their scores must average at 90 percent or better on each of the required courses. The scoring requirement to become a sniper is even higher. Team members train regularly with handguns, rifles, shotguns, and submachine guns (subguns). Each member is trained and practices to become quite skilled in firing the .223 caliber semiautomatic M16 Bushmaster rifle.SWAT sniper.Snipers are trained to fire rifles such as the Remington 700, which is sometimes equipped with a night-vision scope. The Remington 700 is a favorite weapon of the U.S. Marine Corps. It's a bolt-action rifle that weighs approximately four kilograms without the scope and fires .223 caliber ammunition. Under good conditions — clear weather, no wind or smog — a sniper can fire the 700 with accuracy at a range of more than 860 yards, the length of nearly nine football fields.SWAT training is intense and extremely demanding. Standards for SWAT teams nationwide were established in 1983 by the elite SWAT team of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. Along with the standards, they also formed the National Tactical Officers Association (NTOA), which is responsible for the basic and in-service training of SWAT teams all across the country.At least once each year SWAT teams renew their certifications, and at other times they undergo specialty training. Areas of special SWAT training include:booby trap and explosive recognitionuse of ballistic shieldscovert operationsbuilding searchesroom clearingwarrant serviceshooting at moving targets from various locationsshooting from various anglesshooting in dim or no lightcounter-ambush tacticsquelling critical situations in special areas, such as hospitals, schools, and factoriesprison cell extraction of violent inmatesground fightingknife fightingstick fightingrappellingneutralizing suicide and homicide bomberschemical agentscounterterrorismcounteracting barricaded suspectsSWAT teams are normally deployed for high-risk search warrant service, hostage rescues, building searches, manhunts, armed robberies, and drug raids. Teams use speed and stealth to quell volatile situations; their presence reduces the risk of injury to police, citizens, and criminals. Canine units are often assigned to SWAT units to assist with criminal apprehension and building searches.A SWAT high-risk entry team normally consists of six to ten officers (preferably ten). The first officer on the team strikes the door with a battering ram and steps to the side to allow the rest of the team to enter. That officer then brings up the rear. The next officer tosses in a concussion grenade, or flash-bang, which generates a small explosion and emits a small amount of smoke. Its purpose is to distract the occupants of a house and provide enough cover to allow the officers to enter safely.Simultaneously, as the front door is breached and the flash-bang explodes, other officers who've been stationed at other doors and windows initiate their part of the entry procedure — the rake and break. Raking and breaking is the breaking in of all the other doors and windows of rooms where there are no exits to the outside. Officers who break in the other doors secure those areas by aiming their automatic weapons through the open windows. Anyone in those rooms are ordered to lay on the floor with their arms outstretched — palms facing upward — so officers can see what, if anything, is in their hands. All suspects are held at gunpoint until the entry team arrives in each of the rooms to handcuff them.The entry team divides into teams of two and moves from one room to the other, making sure there's no one in the room. The team supervisor normally remains in the first room entered and choreographs the search via radio, sending team members to wherever they're needed. Each SWAT team member has a hands-free microphone positioned near his mouth. The radio activation button is mounted on the chest area of his level-three ballistic vests (on the non-gun-hand side) for easy access. A single touch allows him to contact team members.When the entire dwelling has been given the “all clear” by the SWAT commander, detectives who've been waiting outside enter the house to begin their investigation, evidence collection, and interrogations and interviews.
