---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0018_split_001.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["drug", "cocaine", "officer", "user", "crack", "dealer", "use", "also", "search", "time", "marijuana", "often", "police", "one", "high", "law", "make", "sometimes", "many", "methamphetamine", "state", "may", "schedule", "informant", "detective"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0018split001html

---


11
DRUGS, NOT MONEY, ARE THE ROOT OF ALL EVILDrug addiction has only three exit strategies: recovery, insanity, or death. Along the way, incarceration is a real possibility.— D.P. LYLE, M.D., AWARD-WINNING AUTHOR OF FORENSICS FOR DUMMIESWherever major crimes such as larceny, simple assault, robbery, rape, and murder appear, drugs seem to be in tow. I've arrested countless suspects who were under the influence of many types of illegal drugs. In the majority of those cases, the use of at least one of five drugs surfaced — crack cocaine, methamphetamine, alcohol, marijuana, or ecstasy. The type of drug and its side effects varied, but the end result was usually the same — destruction of the user, destruction of the family unit, and incarceration of the addict or recreational user.Police officers and courts are discovering more and more people who are committing crimes and blaming their actions on their use and abuse of physician-prescribed medications, such as hydrocodone (Vicodin), oxycodone (OxyContin), oxycodone with acetaminophen (Percocet), methylphenidate (Ritalin), and clonazepam (Klonopin). These medications are all highly addictive drugs that, either separately or in combination, are known for their mind-altering capabilities. All these drugs are prescribed by doctors for various physical ailments and mental disorders.Mind-altering and mood-enhancing drugs of all types have been used and abused in America since the days of the early settlers. From the early marijuana farms of colonial times to the elaborate clandestine laboratories of today, people have sought ways to achieve new highs. Millions of dollars are spent each year to fight the government's war against drugs. For instance, the U.S. government spent more than nineteen billion dollars on the drug war in 2003, and the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) alone had an operating budget of nearly two and a half billion dollars for the year 2006.Statistics from the U.S. Department of Justice report that more than 50 percent of all state and federal prisoners admit to having been under the influence of either drugs or alcohol at the time of their offenses. Sixty percent of mentally ill prisoners admit that they, too, were under the influence of alcohol and drugs at the time of their offenses. Seventy percent of people receiving probation for their crimes, in lieu of jail or prison time, acknowledge the use of drugs or alcohol at the time of their offenses.Sometimes a court will allow a defendant one chance at rehabilitation in lieu of going to jail for committing a minor offense. If a judge elects to do so, she may order the offender to attend an alcohol or drug treatment program. When the defendant successfully completes the program, his record is cleared. If the defendant fails to complete the program, he must serve the original jail sentence imposed by the court.DRUG SCHEDULESThe U.S. Attorney General's office is charged with the task of evaluating each drug according to its potential for abuse, its pharmacological effects on the body, the current state of scientific knowledge regarding the drug, the extent of risk to public health, and the potential for physical or psychological addiction. Once the evaluation is complete, each drug is listed in a drug schedule maintained by the DEA — a system of categorizing drugs for use by courts to determine the severity of the offense and punishment for the possession or sale of a particular drug.Drugs and other substances that carry a risk of abuse are divided among five specific categories: Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V.Schedule I: includes drugs such as PCP and ecstasy that have an extremely high potential for abuse and addiction by their users. Drugs in this category aren't recognized in the medical community as having any value; therefore, they're considered to be dangerous or harmful to the human body.Schedule II: includes drugs such as heroin and cocaine that also have a very high potential for abuse, but these drugs are recognized as valid medications for medical treatments. The dispensing of these medications is closely supervised and monitored. As with the drugs in Schedule I, Schedule II drugs are highly addictive.Schedule III: includes drugs such as anabolic steroids and codeine that are further down in the schedule yet still have the potential for abuse. The drugs in this category are most often prescribed by doctors and are generally not as addictive or habit-forming as the drugs in the higher categories.Schedule IV: includes drugs such as diazepam (Valium) and phenobarbital that have similar characteristics to Schedule III drugs but have a lower potential for abuse. There's a limited potential for dependence on the drugs in this schedule, although psychological dependence is a possibilitySchedule V: includes all other drugs, such as cough syrup, that aren't listed in any of the upper four categories. The drugs in this category have a very low potential for abuse and addiction.The classification of these drugs by schedule also provides a guideline for the level of severity of an offense and a corresponding punishment for that offense. Illegal possession and distribution of Schedule I drugs is the most severe crime, and subsequently, carries the stiffest penalty for those who violate the laws regarding the drugs in this category. Schedule II is the next most severe category followed by III, IV, and finally Schedule V, which carries the least amount of penalty for the possession, use, and abuse of the drugs listed within.In addition to the drugs and substances listed in the drug schedules, law enforcement officials have found it necessary to monitor the legal sales and possession of certain chemicals that can be used for the manufacturing of illegal drugs, such as methamphetamine and crack cocaine. Vendors such as agricultural supply companies are required by law to keep records of the type, quantity, and the DEA number of each of the listed chemicals they sell. They must also keep accurate records of whom they've sold the chemicals to. The scrutinized chemicals are placed into two groups: Level I, the more closely monitored that includes benzyl cyanide, hydriodic acid, and nitroethane; and Level II, the lesser-supervised group that includes iodine, sulfuric acid, acetone, and benzyl chloride.DRUG USE IN AMERICADuring my career as a police officer I devoted much of my time to the enforcement of narcotics laws. I felt that illegal drugs were the source of most crimes, and I decided early on that the eradication of them would lower the crime rate. It didn't take long for me to realize that the elimination of illegal drugs is an impossible task. The drugs in the following paragraphs are ones that seem to pose the biggest problems for law enforcement officers.MARIJUANAMarijuanaMarijuana is a Schedule I drug. According to the U.S. government, it has no known medical value. The controversy about whether marijuana should be legalized in the United States is a long-standing argument. Many supporters of the legalization of pot believe that the drug has medicinal value or that it simply causes no harm. Supporters also argue that smoking the dried plant leaves causes no more harm to society or to the human body than does alcohol or tobacco; therefore, marijuana should be legalized.The U.S. government wholeheartedly disagrees and still enforces laws prohibiting the use of marijuana for any reason, even in states that have laws permitting the use of marijuana for certain medical conditions, such as chronic pain and glaucoma.Marijuana is most commonly smoked in hand-rolled cigarettes (joints), pipes, water pipes (bongs), or blunts. Blunts are hollowed-out cigars that have been repacked with marijuana. The original thought behind smoking pot in blunts was to disguise the act. Hand-rolled joints are pretty obvious to police officers and to the general public. Now, drug enforcement officers look for people smoking faux cigars as well.In many areas, paraphernalia laws make it illegal for individuals to sell any gadgets (bongs, pipes, and rolling papers) that can be used for the consumption of marijuana and other drugs. It's also illegal in those areas to for people to sell or possess devices used for weighing or packaging any type of illegal drug. Paraphernalia laws can also prohibit legitimate businesses from selling or possessing of any of these objects. However, in some locales these devices are readily available. To dance around the law, shop owners who sell these products simply post signs indicating that their products are for the consumption of tobacco products only.Effects of Marijuana UseAccording to the Partnership for a Drug-Free America, marijuana use can cause impaired memory, distorted perception of the senses, some loss of motor function, rapid heart rate, and anxiety. The Partnership also reports that marijuana smokers who smoke the drug on a regular basis over a long period of time may be taking in many more cancer-causing substances than cigarette smokers who inhale equal amounts of tobacco smoke.The active ingredient in marijuana is delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). When marijuana is smoked or ingested, the THC binds to certain receptors in the brain. This combination sets off cellular reactions that produce the high experienced by users.Smoking marijuana produces a high that can last for several hours. Immediately after smoking marijuana, blood vessels in the eyes begin to enlarge, causing the classic “red-eyes.” The user's heart rate can increase from a normal 60–80 beats per minute to as much as 100 or 120 beats per minute. In some cases, a user's heart rate has even been increased to double the upper range of the normal rate.With the ingestion of marijuana, the brain is tricked by the THC into rewarding the body's pleasure system. As a result, the brain sends signals to release increased amounts of dopamine, causing the user to experience feelings of euphoria. Users say they begin to feel extremely pleasant, and things like colors and sounds are amplified or are more intense. They also say that things may begin to move in slow motion, as though time has become very sluggish and unhurried. Other side effects of smoking marijuana are an almost uncontrollable urge to laugh, loud and/or rapid talking, anxiety, and sometimes an extreme sense of paranoia. Later stages of the intoxication usually bring on periods of sleepiness and an increased inability to judge how time passes.Perhaps one of the more classic effects of marijuana is what its users call the “munchies” — the almost uncontrollable urge to eat. And eat they do. The craving for food is normally a craving for sweets and other junk food, such as candy, chips, ice cream, hot dogs, etc. The urge to eat things in odd combinations that aren't normally part of a person's regular diet is also common. In fact, this occurrence is one thing that sometimes draws a police officer's attention to pot smokers.For example, let's say an officer in the checkout line in a convenience store observes a group of people enter the business. He first notices that their eyes are unusually red. Then the group begins selecting a vast assortment of candy, chips, and soft drinks. To top off their shopping spree, one of the group picks up several jars of pickled pigs' feet. The entire time they're shopping, they giggle and look around nervously.It's a safe bet that the officer will watch the group as they leave the store. If he feels the situation warrants further investigation, he may approach the group and ask them some questions to determine the extent of their intoxication or influence from the drug. He may also ask permission to search the individuals and their vehicle.This type of proactive action by a police officer is quite legal and is often very effective in the prevention of traffic accidents. The action also often leads to arrests for the possession of drugs.Police Efforts Against Marijuana UsagePolice academy recruits are taught to recognize some of the symptoms of marijuana use to assist them in identifying motorists who are possibly driving under the influence of the drug. Some academy instructors also burn thin wafers that mimic the odor of pot smoke so rookie officers will later be able to recognize the scent of burning marijuana.Law enforcement officers, especially those assigned to a drug task force such as a marijuana-eradication unit, are trained to look for signs of marijuana-growing operations. These special task forces are often comprised of officers and agents from a variety of law enforcement agencies, such as local police departments, sheriff's offices, state police, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, the National Guard, Game and Fisheries departments, the U.S. Marshals Service, and Alcoholic Beverage Control. Some of the key things eradication unit officers watch for are:INDOOR MARIJUANA-GROWING OPERATIONSAir-conditioning units installed in storage buildings or other outbuildings and sheds.Water sources, such as new plumbing or water tanks attached to sheds and other outbuildings.Large supplies of potting soil and fertilizers stacked around sheds and outbuildings, or outside entrances to basements.A house, shed, or other outbuilding with an unusually high number of roof vents or fans.Someone who purchases a large number of heat lamps or indoor grow lamps. (Postal workers have been known to report deliveries of these items to police.)Someone other than a farmer who purchases large amounts of potting soil and fertilizer. Miracle-Gro is a popular fertilizer among marijuana growers.Extension cords running to outbuildings.Someone who has a very large electric bill. Utility companies often contact police if customers suddenly have a large increase in their electricity use.Utility meters that have been altered or tampered with. The seals on meter boxes are often cut to allow the suspect to disconnect the meter and replace it with copper bars. This illegal and highly dangerous act allows the thief to use electricity without the power company's knowledge.Windows that sweat. Grow rooms have an extremely high humidity.OUTDOOR MARIJUANA GROWING OPERATIONSPeople who purchase farmland but aren't farmers. Drug dealers often pay cash for property.Farmland with gates that are always locked with heavy chains, cables, and padlocks.Lots of in-and-out traffic to a particular tract of land.Well-worn walking trails throughout a tract of land. The paths are clearly visible from the air.Camouflage netting covering large areas of land tracts. Marijuana has a very distinctive blue-green color that's quite visible from the air.Large purchases of PVC pipe, fertilizer, and potting soil.Water bottles and jugs placed along footpaths.Large purchases of chicken wire. Marijuana growers place chicken wire around their plants to prevent rabbits and other animals from eating the leaves and stalks.An abundance of security signs. Marijuana growers often place several security-type signs around their property, such as Beware of Dog, Video Surveillance in Use, Keep Out, and No Trespassing. Many times the owners place so many of these signs it becomes obvious to police officers that something odd is going on.Purchases of machetes, garden hoses, large garbage bags, staking material, green tie wraps, and green spray paint (to ensure that all things blend in to their surroundings). Many store owners cooperate with police and notify them of purchases of such materials.People who pay cash for nearly all their purchases.People who visit a certain area of the woods at regular times of the day (to water and tend to their plants).COCAINEPowdered cocaine.Cocaine is a Schedule II drug. It's highly addictive and acts as a stimulant to the central nervous system. Dopamine, the naturally produced chemical, offers up feelings of pleasure and enjoyment. Those pleasing sensations make users want to do things that make them feel good, such as having sex and eating great food. When cocaine is consumed, the drug begins to interfere with how the body reabsorbs dopamine. The drug actually increases the amount of dopamine in the body by as much as 150 percent.Hydrochloride, the powdered form of cocaine, can be introduced into the body by snorting (inhalation) or injection (via needle). To inject cocaine, a user must first dissolve the drug in water. To snort cocaine, the user inhales the powder directly into her nose.Cocaine use seems to be most prevalent among users between the ages of eighteen and twenty-four. Unfortunately, U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) statistics show that a substantial group of school-age children are users of cocaine. A 2005 DOJ poll indicates that 3.7 percent of our nation's eighth graders abuse the drug as well as 5.2 percent of all tenth graders. An alarming 8 percent of high school seniors use cocaine on a regular basis.Effects of Cocaine UsageWhen cocaine is introduced into the body, its effects begin almost immediately and last only for a few minutes. The drug causes a distinct constriction of the blood vessels and dilates the pupils of the eyes. The heart rate becomes rapid, body temperature goes up, and blood pressure increases. Hyperactivity is a classic symptom of cocaine use. The drug gives its user a sense of sudden energy and a boost in fighting fatigue. Sleep is normally out of the question during cocaine use, especially during a period of prolonged use, which sometimes lasts for four or five days.At the end of a cocaine binge, which is sometimes called “feeming” or “rocking out,” an addict will be so exhausted from lack of sleep and hunger that he simply passes out and remains unconscious for many hours. Sometimes he even requires hospitalization. Large dosages of cocaine have been known to cause users to exhibit episodes of extremely violent behavior. Death has also been known to occur as a result of cardiac arrest.Long-term cocaine use can cause hallucinations, extreme paranoia and psychosis, depression, and respiratory problems.Cocaine also induces antisocial behavior. Addicts and users miss a lot of time from work, they're often caught lying, and they steal to support their very expensive habits. Police officers are sometimes alerted to a person's addiction by their patterns of thievery. A cocaine addict, as well as addicts of other drugs (this behavior is more often associated with addicts of stimulants), often steals things like DVD players, VCRs, televisions, guns, money, and jewelry — individual items they can sell for at least twenty dollars, the amount of a single hit of cocaine.People who buy these items from cocaine addicts usually know the cost of the drug and rarely ever offer the seller any more than twenty dollars per item. They know the addict will settle for that amount. They also know the addict will be back later in the day or night with another stolen item for sale. This is a never-ending cycle for the cocaine addict.CRACK COCAINECrack cocaine is one of the most addictive illegal drugs of all time and is one of the easiest to make. Smoking a crack rock takes only a minute or so and the high can last for as little as a few seconds. Unfortunately, unlike other drugs that require prolonged use to create physical dependency, crack cocaine can create an addiction the first time a user smokes it.The intense rush experienced with the use of crack cocaine together with the powerful need to smoke more only minutes later causes a quicker addiction to crack cocaine than users experience with powdered cocaine. In a few minutes the user will return, looking for the same runner from whom to buy more crack.Crack cocaine, because it's not pure, is less expensive than its original powdered form. The drug was once thought to be a drug of choice for the lower class, but not anymore. The drug is found in every neighborhood in America.Crack Cocaine DealersCrack cocaine.A major drug dealer sells powdered cocaine to street dealers; those street dealers then make the more addictive crack cocaine by combining cocaine with baking soda and water. The dealer cooks the blend for a few minutes in a microwave oven and then air-dries the mixture so it cools and hardens. After the mixture cools, the dealer lays out the drug in sheets resembling thin, flattened cookie dough. As the sheet of crack cocaine cools, it pops and crackles, much like Rice Krispies cereal does when milk is added to it. The name “crack” was derived from these sounds. The dealer then cuts the crack with a razor blade, dividing it into pea-sized pieces called “rocks” because they resemble small white pebbles. The dealer wraps each rock individually with aluminum foil, cellophane, or corners torn from plastic baggies and sells them for twenty dollars each. Crack rocks are also packaged in tiny, factory-made ziplock bags.The sale of crack cocaine is quick and discreet. Potential customers ride through a neighborhood known for drug sales. They stop beside anyone standing along the street and simply ask if they “have anything” or if “anything's going on.” If the person they've approached is indeed a runner, he'll ask what they want. If the user is looking for only one rock, as is often the case, he'll respond by saying, “a twenty.” A runner sometimes keeps one twenty-piece inside his mouth and, to complete the transaction, spits it into his hand, exchanges the aluminum-foil-wrapped rock for a twenty-dollar bill, and walks away. This entire business deal takes a matter of seconds. The driver pulls away and goes to the first spot he can find to smoke the rock.Crack Cocaine UsersA user, or “crackhead,” high on crack cocaine exhibits signs of extreme nervousness and agitation. She's normally very talkative, and her actions are jerky and erratic. She experiences sudden and sometimes extreme mood swings. Chronic users show signs of rapid weight loss, malnourishment, tooth loss, and premature aging.Crack addicts quickly find themselves in constant trouble with family, friends, and eventually the law because of the stealing and shoplifting they must do to support their habits. Users sometimes turn to prostitution as a means of financing their habits.Users smoke crack from objects like empty beer cans and cut-off boom-box antennas. To use a can for a pipe, the smoker lays the can on its side and makes a small dent with his thumb on the side of the can near the bottom. He then makes a circular pattern of tiny holes in the indented area using a nail or other sharp object. The holes must only be large enough to allow smoke to pass through. The crack rock is placed onto the indented area above the holes. Holding the tab opening to his mouth the smoker can now apply a flame to the crack and inhale the smoke as it passes through the can.Crack doesn't remain lit like tobacco or marijuana, so the smoker must constantly apply a flame to keep it burning. This constant source of heat causes the thin metal holding the crack to become very hot and often results in burns or blistering on the smoker's fingers and lips.To use the antenna as a pipe, the smoker breaks off a six-inch section of the antenna and packs the largest end with a small piece of steel wool or any other type of porous, metal scouring pad. The user places a piece of crack cocaine against the scouring pad and then holds the flame to it while inhaling from the smaller, opposite end of the “pipe.” These makeshift pipes become hot quickly and have been known to burn the lips and fingers of smokers. Those burn marks are telltale signs of a crack smoker.The user never seems to buy more than two or three rocks at any one time. I've been told by addicts they do this because they hope they can find the willpower to stop after smoking only one or two. Most users never do. Obviously, going through twenty dollars every few minutes for hours at a time is expensive. Addicts do whatever it takes to get their next hit, and crime is often the only option. IN THE LINE OF DUTY A PORTRAIT OF AN ADDICTI recall standing in the courthouse speaking with a prisoner who was charged with possession of crack cocaine, breaking and entering, and grand larceny. The inmate sat on a wooden bench awaiting his trial. Sweat dotted his forehead, and he constantly wrung his hands together, almost as if he was trying to warm them. Clearly that wasn't the reason — it was mid-July.His wrists were tightly handcuffed and the pant legs of his orange jail-issue jumpsuit were rolled up a couple of turns to prevent them from getting caught in the chains that connected the shackles circling his ankles. His right foot acted as a lever while his leg bounced up and down. He was visibly anxious about the impending legal proceedings.It's a common occurrence for inmates to talk about their troubles while waiting for their turn in front of the judge. Some talk to police officers because they have no one else to talk to; others talk because thoughts of long prison sentences rattle their nerves. This man was obviously nervous about the impending legal proceedings, and he began to speak quite openly and freely to me about his drug use.The man, thin and malnourished, began by describing the intense hold the drug had over him. He told me that he knew better than to do the things he did, like stealing and prostitution, but he simply couldn't stop. The drug controlled him and his mind. I asked him what the high felt like, and he told me to imagine the most intense orgasm ever, then multiply that by one thousand and maybe, just maybe, that would be close to describing how good it felt to be high on crack.He and I had gone to the same high school and had played side-by-side on the same championship football team. In those days, he had been muscular in body and strong in mind. He'd been an honor roll student and a star, three-letter athlete. He was assured of a college scholarship for football. He had had a future, a real future, a chance to be someone in this world. Instead, he sat before me facing several years of confinement in a state prison.My old friend was pitiful. His body could only be described as skeletal. His arms were thin rails. His cheeks and eyes were sunken from months of going without proper meals. He had lost several teeth (another classic sign of chronic crack cocaine use and something police officers watch for), and he'd developed a palsy-like shake in his right hand. He was a crackhead — an addict.I listened while he described his drug habit. He told me he smoked crack cocaine every day, as often during the day as he could. I asked him how long he waited after each hit before he smoked again. He said that when he put the lighter to a crack rock to smoke it, he was already thinking of where to get the next hit and how he was going to get it.He told me he had more than a thousand-dollar-a-day habit and was unemployed; he had been for years. He'd lost his job to excessive absenteeism months prior to his arrest. He'd sold all his personal possessions, had no home, and had even been forbidden to visit the homes of his entire family. They could no longer trust him around their personal belongings. He'd stolen everything he could get his hands on. He'd even started taking things from his beloved grandmother, the woman who raised him and went without so that he might have a chance in life, something she'd never had. He'd been caught breaking into her house to steal her VCR. This was the event that caused him to be awaiting his day in court.Police Efforts Against Cocaine and CrackCrack cocaine and the problems that arise from its sales and use are some of the biggest issues facing drug cops today. Crack is more addictive, easier to hide, and easier to make than many other drugs.Unlike methamphetamine, crack manufacturers don't need large, complicated laboratories to make their product. All that's needed to make crack is a small microwave oven or a cooktop, a box of baking soda, a little water, and some powdered cocaine. Since the drug can be made in any bedroom, bathroom, kitchen, or toolshed, finding a crack dealer's lair can be nearly impossible.Crack cocaine carries a much stiffer penalty than powdered cocaine. In fact, the federal mandatory minimum sentencing ratio between crack cocaine and powdered cocaine is 100:1, meaning it takes one hundred times more powdered cocaine than crack to receive the same sentence. For example, five grams of crack will earn an offender five years in federal prison. It would take five hundred grams of powdered cocaine to receive the same sentence. Incidentally, before the five grams is cut into the smaller pieces dealers sell to their users, it's worth a little over one hundred dollars. After the five grams is cut into individual pieces (approximately thirty pieces), its return value is about six hundred dollars.The sentences for crack cocaine are so harsh that some law enforcement officers have actually waited until a suspect has cooked cocaine into the more dangerous and addictive crack before arresting him because the penalties are much higher for crack cocaine than powdered cocaine.According to the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, which we'll discuss, the mandatory minimum sentence for the possession of five grams of crack cocaine is five years in federal prison. If the defendant had a firearm in his possession at the time of the drug offense, he automatically receives an additional mandatory five years in prison, for a total of ten years.METHAMPHETAMINEMethamphetamine is a Schedule II drug. Often called “The Devil's Drug” by its users, methamphetamine, like cocaine and crack cocaine, is highly addictive. Users and abusers find themselves consuming it more frequently and in larger doses with each use. Other names for the drug are meth, crank, crystal, hillbilly crack, buzzard dust, booger sugar, poison, Satan dust, Scooby snacks, and shit.Effects of Methamphetamine UsageMethamphetamine and pipe used for smoking it.Methamphetamine, like crack cocaine, is a stimulant associated with extremely violent behavior in its users and abusers. The drug deadens pain receptors, enabling the user to hyperextend her joints into abnormal positions. These individuals also seem to have above-average strength when high on the drug. Sometimes users are so extremely violent it requires several police officers to physically maintain control of a criminal who's high on methamphetamine. officers are often forced to use weapons such as Tasers and chemical sprays to subdue these violent offenders, and sometimes even these methods are ineffective.Methamphetamine reduces the levels of dopamine in a user's brain by damaging the brain cells containing neurotransmitters. Dopamine is crucial to the functioning capabilities of the central nervous system. The damaged cells can result in an involuntary-movement disorder similar to Parkinson's disease.Methamphetamine use can cause an increased heart rate and raised blood pressure. This explains the “wired” effect police officers so often encounter when dealing with a subject high on the drug. The user can't seem to sit still; she talks nonstop like a 45 rpm record played on the turntable at 78 rpm, and her movements are rapid and jittery. It's as if the user has an electrical charge hooked to her that she can't turn off. Large doses of meth can cause an extreme rise in body temperature.Meth DealersDrug dealers use ephedrine or pseudoephedrine to produce methamphetamine in makeshift laboratories. Ephedrine is a controlled drug found in many over-the-counter medications available for coughing and weight loss. The recipe for methamphetamine also includes anhydrous ammonia, a colorless gas used as an industrial refrigerant and in chemical fertilizers. Anhydrous ammonia (anhydrous means without water) is a regulated chemical requiring a license to possess, so drug dealers must steal it. To obtain it, they usually go to agricultural supply warehouses at night and transfer the gas from large storage tanks to smaller propane tanks. During the theft, gas often leaks into the atmosphere, exposing the community to its fumes.Drug dealers who manufacture methamphetamine constantly place themselves in harm's way. Not only are they at immediate risk of going to prison, but the health hazards associated with making the drug are enormous. Contact with the vaporizing liquid can cause frostbite, which can lead to a loss of fingers, hands, or entire limbs.Anhydrous ammonia reacts with any moisture; therefore, when it contacts human tissue, which is comprised mostly of water, the reaction begins instantly. This reaction causes severe chemical burns to the skin. Other dangers of contacting anhydrous ammonia are a rapid swelling of the throat, laryngeal spasms that can lead to asphyxia, lung damage, blindness, chemical burns to the lungs, and pulmonary edema (fluid in the lungs).Other chemicals used in the production of methamphetamine are ether, sulfuric acid, lithium (usually obtained from lithium batteries), iodine crystals, hydrochloric acid, muriatic acid, sodium hydroxide, acetone, and Coleman stove or lantern fuel.Drug dealers blend and cook a combination of these chemicals to produce the desired product. This cooking process produces a number of hazardous, toxic fumes such as invisible phosphorous gas and hazardous waste such as lye, hydrochloric acid, cyanide, and chlorinated solvents. Many of these chemicals are highly flammable and often result in fires and explosions within the makeshift labs. Drug dealers are very often badly burned or killed. The odor emitted from these labs is frequently compared to rotten eggs.In the United States, meth laboratories normally produce anywhere from ten to fifty pounds of methamphetamine in a few hours, usually overnight. The larger, better-equipped laboratories in Mexico can produce anywhere from 150 to 200 pounds in the same amount of time. Clandestine labs in the United States can be set up almost anywhere and at any time. Police officers find them in places like trailers, storage sheds, mobile homes, houses, basements, attics, caves, shacks, and even underground rooms. One meth manufacturer buried a shipping container and used the trailer-like structure as an underground laboratory. Meth laboratories are usually set up so the dealer can pack up and leave in a hurry in case the police are about to close in on the operation.Meth UsersThere are often visible sores on a methamphetamine user's face, hands, and arms from prolonged use of the drug. Those in drug circles refer to these as “crank craters.” These open sores and scarring of the skin are self-inflicted wounds the user creates when he picks hallucinatory “crank bugs” from his skin. Users can experience irreversible damage to the blood vessels in their brains, sometimes producing strokes, and can suffer from respiratory problems, irregular heartbeats, collapse of the entire cardiovascular system, anorexia, and even death.Addicts and users have nicknames for themselves such as battery benders, go-go losers, neck creatures, shadow people, tweakers, and wiggers. Their terms for getting high on methamphetamine are amping, rolling hard, spun, wired, zooming, zoning, ring dang do, and pissed.Users who go on binges, called “runs” or “running,” sometimes inject the drug into their systems at a rate of every two or three hours for several days in a row. During this period of time, users normally don't eat, drink, or sleep, causing dehydration, malnourishment, and exhaustion. Hallucinations and psychosis are common.Methamphetamine users come from no particular group of people. What was once thought to be a drug of the poor is now abused by people from all cultures and ethnic groups. Nearly twelve million people in the United States alone admit to using meth at least once in their lifetime. In the year 2005, 6.2 percent of all high school students admitted to using meth. While that figure is high, it's still much lower than the 9.8 percent of students who reported trying methamphetamine in the year 2001.Police Efforts Against MethUnlike any other drug, methamphetamine poses an unusual problem for law enforcement officers. Not only must they deal with the normal difficulties of employing the use of informants, undercover officers, stakeouts, drug buys, and search warrants, but they're faced with the danger of clandestine drug laboratories that contain gallons of highly volatile materials that can ignite and explode without warning. These materials, acids, and explosives, sometimes called volatile organic compounds, also emit toxic fumes that can cause nausea, breathing difficulties, and even cancer. When dealing with a meth lab, officers must wear full biohazard gear.In an effort to reduce and control the production of methamphetamine, stores are now required to display and store ephedrine or pseudoephedrine-based medications behind the counter. Those businesses are also required by law to maintain a logbook containing the names of people who purchase these medications.There were 1,036 people sentenced for methamphetamine-related crimes during the period of October 1, 2004 to January 11, 2005. An additional 3,703 were sentenced for the same type of crime from January 12, 2005 to September 30, 2005. More than 95 percent of these cases involved trafficking, not use, of methamphetamine.ECSTASYEcstasy tablets.Ecstasy, or MDMA (methylenedioxymethamphetamine), is a Schedule I drug popular among today's youth. As its name suggests, it's chemically akin to its cousin, methamphetamine. It's also very similar to the hallucinogen mescaline. MDMA is a synthetic drug that's available throughout the world. It's very popular with teens and young adults because it reduces inhibitions and isn't known to be physically addictive.Parties known as “raves” feature ecstasy, also known as E, Cadillac, pink pig, lollipop, smile, snowball, the hug drug, disco biscuit, and California sunshine, as the event's main attraction. The effects of the drug are heightened perceptions of color and sound, hallucinations, and amplification of the sensation of touch, particularly during sex.Ecstasy was patented in 1914 by the pharmaceutical company Merck but was abandoned for sixty years, then was reintroduced in the late 1970s for use in psychotherapy. Its effects last anywhere from three to six hours, and the drug is considered a mood elevator. Normally, its users are passive; violence isn't a side effect.Partygoers are known for introducing the drug, also aptly named “The Love Drug,” into an unsuspecting person's drink with hopes of taking advantage of that person's drug-induced amorous state.An ecstasy user must continually increase the amount of drug he takes to feel the same effect. Some possible side effects of ecstasy are elevated body temperature (a danger in the party atmosphere, where hours of dancing contribute to already high body temperature), elevated heart rate, and elevated blood pressure. This type of rapid increase in body temperature can result in damage to the heart, liver, and kidneys and can also cause death. After the effects of the drug wear off, the user may experience periods of extreme depression, confusion, anxiety, paranoia, psychotic episodes, and hallucinations.The DEA has learned that nearly all ecstasy seized in the United States is manufactured in the Netherlands. The drug is shipped to the United States via cargo containers, luggage, and through express-type mail services.Ecstasy is so popular among school-age children that recent studies indicate that 40 percent of all eighth graders, 51.4 percent of all tenth graders, and a whopping 61.4 percent of all high school seniors have all tried the drug at least once. Many admit to using ecstasy on a regular basis.TRAFFICKINGInterstate 95 is a major highway that runs from Maine to Florida and is considered by law enforcement agencies to be the main drug corridor on the East Coast. Any city lying within a few miles of that highway is subject to high drug activity, due the availability of illegal drugs and the easy access for delivery.Every day, large quantities of marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, heroin, ecstasy, methamphetamine, and illegal pharmaceuticals make their way up and down the East Coast inside both passenger and commercial vehicles. The narcotics are hidden within door panels of cars, in secret compartments built into gas tanks and batteries, inside spare tires, and inside trunks.Unless the driver makes a mistake in driving or becomes involved in an accident, it's very difficult for police officers to detect these shipments. The drivers are usually hired by dealers to make the deliveries and often aren't aware of the cargo. They're sometimes instructed to deliver the car to a specific location and leave it. They can then either return home by plane or bus. These delivery people are called mules.A mule can also be a person in the permanent employ of a drug dealer, as is often seen in organized crime. In this situation, the mule is usually aware of his goods and of their illegality. Unlike the run-of-the-mill street runners and dealers, a member of an organized crime family usually protects his boss' identity and takes the full blame for his actions. After the arrest of a mule within an organized crime family, the employer usually assumes the mule's financial obligations while he's in prison. The employer sees to it that the mule's family is well taken care of and sends money to the incarcerated mule as well.Street runners and dealers very often tell or “snitch” on their employers in order to receive a lighter sentence from the courts. If apprehended by the police, these individuals are normally left to fend for themselves; their bosses will sometimes pack up and leave an area entirely to avoid arrest.Once a shipment of drugs arrives in an area and makes it undetected into the hands of the local dealer, the dealer divides the shipment among his street runners for sale. The runners aren't allowed to handle much of the drug at a time in case they're caught but are normally given approximately three hundred dollars worth of a drug at one time. In the case of crack cocaine, three hundred dollars worth is equal to fifteen “rocks.”The rocks are often carried in a film canister, with the cylinder about half full of crack rocks. When the runners sell that amount, they return to the dealer and exchange the cash for more drugs. This process continues until the entire shipment is sold. On a busy night, this can take only a few hours.DRUG BUSTS: FIGHTING THE WAR ON DRUGSRounding up drug dealers can be an overwhelming task. The process is often a combined, well-orchestrated effort involving dozens of law enforcement officials, such as local, state, and federal police officers (both uniformed and undercover), informants, entry teams, supervisors, canines, air support, crime scene technicians, magistrates, judges, prosecutors, child protective officers, probation and parole officers, prison officials, and even animal control officers.The foundation for a drug raid is sometimes laid months and even years prior to the date investigators actually obtain and execute the search warrant. The biggest drug busts can start with something as small as a traffic stop made by a rookie officer who asks the simple question, “Do you mind if I search your car?” A positive response to the officer's question can lead to her finding a single joint in the driver's console. That single joint can start a domino effect that ends up toppling a network of major drug dealers.Many officers will arrange to make a deal with an offender if he provides the police with the name of the person who sold him the drugs. That information may lead officers to the arrest of the seller, who then can provide the name of his dealer, and so on. Since drug cases can be very time-consuming, uniformed officers normally turn over their information and files to narcotics detectives.An undercover agent participates in a drug raid.Narcotics detectives try to find someone, either an informant or an undercover officer, who can infiltrate the drug dealer's circle of friends and associates. A likely person to become an informant would be the offender who was initially arrested by the traffic officer for possessing the joint. Police and prosecutors may arrange to have an informant's charges dismissed if she assists the police with their investigation. However, police officers can't promise a dismissal or reduction of any charges without approval from the prosecuting attorney.To establish probable cause for the acquisition of a search warrant, narcotics detectives must first determine that a suspected drug dealer is actually selling drugs. The best way to do so is through intensive surveillance and to have informants or undercover officers purchase drugs from the dealer. Most departments have a special fund that's reserved just for the purchase of drugs. In fact, most narcotics officers keep a few hundred dollars on hand at all times. They call this cash “buy money.” Buy money can also be used to pay informants a fee for their services. Normally, informants who are “working off” their criminal charges don't receive money for their efforts.The narcotics detectives must also establish the reliability, credibility, and trustworthiness of an informant. The informant must prove to the detectives that the information he provides is indeed true. He does so by making controlled, supervised drug buys from dealers and then delivering those drugs to detectives. The rule of thumb is that if an informant makes three controlled drug buys and delivers those drugs to detectives, without fail, he's established his reliability. Sometimes, informants wear tiny microphones and transmitters called wires so detectives may monitor their conversations with the drug dealer.Narcotics detectives either treat money used for drug buys with an invisible marking chemical (which becomes visible when exposed to alternate light sources) or record the serial numbers. Marked money found in the possession of a suspect is proof that he participated in the drug deal.This process of surveillance and buying drugs could last for a few days or for weeks. When narcotics detectives feel they've established probable cause and are reasonably sure the dealer has drugs in his house, they turn to the official paperwork portion of the case. They fill out the affidavit for the search, detailing all the reasons leading them to believe a crime has occurred and that a search of the dealer's home is necessary to locate his stash of illegal drugs.At this point, narcotics detectives call in a team of officers who will assist in the execution of the search. Depending upon the danger level of the search, this team can consist of as few as three or four officers to as many as two dozen heavily armed entry-team specialists. Narcotics canine teams are also called in to participate. The team meets at a prearranged place to await the signal to begin the raid. Anxieties are always high during this stage of the process. Officers never know what to expect.With the search team standing by at a predetermined, secret location, narcotics detectives meet with a judge or magistrate (day or night) to obtain the actual search warrant. The judge reviews the affidavit, and, if she's satisfied that the criteria for probable cause have been met, she approves and signs a search warrant.Armed with the search warrant, narcotics detectives meet with the search team to brief them on the layout of the suspect's house, the possibility of weapons inside the house (based on the word of the informant who's been inside), and the specific assignment for each team member.Surprise is the key to a successful raid. The entry team may approach the search area or building in separate groups. Some officers may arrive in old vans or service trucks; others may approach on foot. No matter how they get there, the entry must be quick. If the search is expected to be dangerous, officers will have obtained a no-knock warrant and will normally break in the front and rear doors simultaneously. At the same time, other officers may break out all the lower-level windows and monitor each of those rooms.For the safety of the officers, everyone inside the house is handcuffed, and they're usually all placed into the same room where they're guarded by an officer who's been previously assigned to that duty. Everyone is patted down for weapons. The target suspect (the drug dealer) is normally searched a little more extensively because officers are hoping to locate some or all of their marked money.officers carefully search the entire house to ensure that no one is hiding. Once the all clear is given, the house is turned over to narcotics detectives to conduct a very thorough, detailed search for drugs, drug paraphernalia, records, money, packaging material, and other items associated with drug sales. Detectives may have a narcotics canine search the house before they begin their search. They may also have the dog search again when they're finished.Narcotics detectives search every square inch of the house, including the inside of the toilet tank and behind each light switch and receptacle plate. They look for hidden panels, trap doors, safes, and secret hiding places. Normally, officers aren't very neat when searching for drugs. Drawers are emptied onto table tops and the floor; mattresses are removed and overturned; closets, boxes, and cartons are emptied; sofa cushions are removed; and the contents of refrigerators and freezers are removed and searched. Detectives even peer into light fixtures and sink drains.A drug testing kit.If drugs are found, the narcotics detectives collect and package them in evidence bags. They may use field tests to determine the type and authenticity of the drugs they've discovered. The drugs will remain in these packages until they're delivered to the laboratory for testing. When the testing is complete, the drugs are placed back into the original evidence container, resealed, and returned to the detectives. If the department is equipped with an evidence locker room, the drugs are kept there until trial. After trial, the drugs are destroyed.The police aren't required to clean up after a search, nor are they required to put anything back that they've removed. Sometimes, when officers leave, the house looks like a bomb's been detonated inside. Some search warrant teams are neater than others.It can take several hours to complete a drug raid, so, as a sort of celebration, it's quite common for the entire search team to meet at a favorite restaurant or coffeehouse after a search to unwind, debrief, and offer praises to one another for getting another dealer off the streets.It is here, at these informal, post-raid gatherings, that stories are told, jokes are cracked, and tensions are allowed to dissipate. But it's the knowledge that everyone made it safely through the danger that feels so good.In many areas of the country, when a police officer obtains an arrest warrant (subsequent or prior to serving a search warrant) for someone who's accused of a drug crime, the warrant will specify which type of drug is suspected and where in the drug schedule it's listed. For example, the body of a felony arrest warrant (form DC-312) from the state of Virginia reads:TO ANY AUTHORIZED OFFICER:ACCUSED: John D. CrackheadYou are hereby commanded in the name of the Commonwealth of Virginia forthwith to arrest and bring the accused before this Court to answer the charge that the Accused, within this city or county, on or about June 3, 2006, did unlawfully and feloniously in violation of Section 18.2-248 Sec. A Code of Virginia, possess with the intent to distribute a controlled substance, namely cocaine, listed in Schedule II.Section 18.2-248 Sec.(a) of the Code of Virginia states that it's illegal for any person to make, sell, give, or distribute in any way a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance. The code section further states that the penalty for violating this particular law is a term in prison of not less than five years and not more forty years. In addition to the prison sentence, a judge may also impose a fine of not more then $500,000. (These laws vary from state to state. Federal sentencing guidelines, which we'll look at next, are different than state guidelines.) IN THE LINE OF DUTY THE “DOWNTOWN BOYS”We had the “Downtown Boys” under surveillance for months. The gang had commandeered an entire section of one the local projects as a base for manufacturing and selling crack cocaine. I'd finally gotten a very reliable informant to gain the trust of these hardened street dealers. He'd been on the inside for months, and they considered him one of their own. Weeks before, I'd instructed a crew to mount a camera that looked like an electrical transformer on a telephone pole, and my partner and I maintained constant surveillance on the area from a monitor in our office. We could pan, zoom, and do everything necessary to build a large library of video evidence on the gang members.INTERESTING DRUG FACTSIn 1999, federal prisons housed 721,500 parents of minor children. Most of those prisoners were incarcerated for drug-related crimes.Almost 3 percent of all children under the age of eighteen have at least one parent either in prison or jail. The majority of those inmates were arrested for drug-related offenses.In 2005, more than half of all U.S. students reported they had tried an illegal drug prior to their high school graduation.In 1994, the total property seized by and forfeited to the federal government in drug-related crimes was valued at 730 million dollars.I decided the time was right to raid the gang's operation on a hot summer afternoon. The humidity that day was high enough to make sweat seem dry. I gathered my information and sent the informant to the projects for one last look at the cache of drugs and the location of the drugs within the rooms, and to find out how many people were in the apartment. I wanted to know how many of those people were armed and, if possible, what kind of weapons they possessed. I told my informant to be particularly aware of the presence of innocent children. I wanted to be prepared for the worst.The other officers and I suited up with vests, shields, and masks to avoid recognition of the undercover guys, and we armed ourselves with shotguns and MP5 automatic machine guns, each with a one-hundred-round magazine. Our adrenaline was soaring as high as the outside temperature. I asked the informant to make a mental note of the correct address on the suspects' front door so I could enter it in the appropriate block on the affidavit and on the search warrant. He returned and was very excited about the news he had to report. The gang had more cocaine inside the apartment than he'd ever seen. They'd just received a fresh shipment of powdered cocaine and were preparing to cook it up into crack. He went on to say that we should be careful because the eight men inside were all carrying, which meant they were all armed. This was going to be a dangerous bust. These guys had killed before and wouldn't be taken easily.I got the search warrant from the court and had the teams in place by noon. We were all focused on the address followed by “apartment B.” I gave the all clear, and the entry team hit the door with a battering ram. We had the apartment cleared and secure in record time without a single shot fired. The only problem was, we were at the wrong apartment. The address should have been apartment D instead of B. My top-notch informant had given me the wrong address. We had raided the house of an eighty-year-old widow who was seated in her favorite rocker eating ice cream while watching a Lawrence Welk Show rerun. Her door exploded, and the apartment was suddenly filled with a dozen masked men brandishing fully automatic weapons, screaming for her to get on the floor.She never got excited, never raised her voice, and never stopped eating her ice cream. She merely looked at me, pointed to her right with a spoon and, with a deep southern drawl through a toothless mouth, said, “I think ya'll boys want da 'partment next door.”I looked outside and down the walkway. The entire group of Downtown Boys was standing outside of apartment D laughing at us.Not one of my better days.Besides having to pay for a new door, new doorjamb, and fresh paint and carpet cleaning, the entire operation cost our department financially and took a toll on many of us physically and mentally. I also bought a half-gallon of Rocky Road ice cream, as a peace offering, for the very understanding grandmother of twelve.It takes a while to regain ground from mistakes such as this one, but persistence pays off. Drug dealers have an addiction to sell a drug, just as the user has an addiction to use it. Greed plays a large part in drug sales, but a great deal of the need to sell drugs is in the dealer wanting to beat the system. They like the cat-and-mouse game played between law enforcement and the bad guys.It took many more months to round up the Downtown Boys, but we finally got them — not in a group as I'd hoped — but as individuals. Patience and persistence is the key to really good police work. Oh … and the correct address on a search warrant helps quite a bit.FEDERAL SENTENCING GUIDELINES FOR DRUG OFFENSESThe U.S. government has developed guidelines for determining what it deems an appropriate and universal system of sentencing people who have been convicted of narcotics offenses. The particular drugs and corresponding amounts of those drugs that a suspect is charged with possessing, selling, or attempting to sell are divided into levels (categories). These levels make up what is known as the Drug Quantity Table (see appendix C). For each level of offense there's a corresponding sentence that's specified in a separate table, the Federal Sentencing Table (see appendix D).Federal judges use the Federal Sentencing Table to determine the sentence of all convicted federal offenders. Each offender is assigned a number of criminal history points depending on her prior criminal record. The more arrests she has in her past, the higher her point level. When the offender's criminal history category has been determined, the judge compares that number with its corresponding offense level on the chart. The intersection of those two points is the sentence range allowed for that particular drug offense. The same method is used for all federal offenses.For example, let's say Joe Crackhead is found guilty of possession of 1.5 kilograms of crack cocaine (cocaine base), which is a base offense level 38. It's determined that Mr. Crackhead has never been arrested in the past. His clean record gives him a 0 in the criminal history category. The points intersect at the sentence of 235 to 293 months; therefore, the judge may sentence Mr. Crackhead anywhere within that fifty-eight month range.
