---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0009.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["recruit", "police", "training", "academy", "officer", "car", "day", "week", "taught", "instructor", "vehicle", "technique", "exercise", "driver", "law", "time", "one", "must", "course", "traffic", "control", "driving", "field", "suspect", "department"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0009html

---


2
2THE POLICE ACADEMYTraining is without a doubt the most important investment that a police department can make. With ever-changing tools, techniques, and laws, it's imperative that today's police officer is constantly afforded the best training to provide the best service possible to the public that they serve.— SERGEANT ED BUNS, TRAINING SUPERVISOR, HAMILTON, OHIO, POLICE DEPARTMENTLarge law enforcement departments normally maintain their own police academies. Smaller agencies sometimes pool together and operate multi-jurisdictional academies, where candidates from various police departments and sheriffs' offices attend the same classes.Each police academy teaches the fundamentals of law enforcement. Recruits are schooled in areas such as basic law, driving, firearms, officer safety and survival, defensive tactics, accident investigation, human behavior and psychology, crime scene management, and interview and interrogation.Recruits participate in mock exercises simulating nearly every possible scenario they might one day encounter in the field, from shootouts to hostage situations. They're graded through practical and written exercises and exams. The training is extremely extensive and stressful.Academy life is similar to military boot camp training, and police recruits are often pushed to the limits of their physical and mental capabilities. All prospective police officers must undergo and pass a physical examination prior to their enrollment in a police academy. My academy instructors insisted that recruits run everywhere as their primary mode of transportation. We ran to meals and to classes; we even ran to the streets and forest trails where we were to begin our daily five-mile run.There's no room in a police academy for someone who's not willing to put 100-percent effort into every assigned task. Instructors actually expect a 110 percent effort — they want to see the extra effort. In fact, they demand it.The men in our class had to keep their hair closely cropped. The women wore theirs pinned up or cut short. No one was allowed to have hair touching his shirt collar.We all were required to keep our shoes shined to a glossy sheen.Dress uniforms, Class A as they're called, had to be neatly pressed, with creases nearly sharp enough to slice bread. I even saw instructors looking into the ears and noses of recruits, searching for a stray hair. The consequence for any infraction of the dress code by any recruit was hundreds of push-ups for the entire class. Needless to say, we were a self-policing group that groomed one another, like monkeys, prior to inspections.The length of training time varies for different academies. Some police officer certification courses last for as little as thirteen weeks, while others last for as long as thirty-six weeks or more, depending on individual departmental requirements.The police academy course of instruction begins with an orientation much like any high school or college. Recruits sit at desks, poised to take notes from instructors who are either permanent employees of the academy or volunteers from various police departments and sheriffs' offices. The instructors are experts in their various fields, and most are certified as academy instructors by the U.S. Department of Justice.The recruits are first given a broad overview of their chosen career. They're told of the dangers, the accompanying anxiety, and the long hours that come with the job. Instructors stress that new officers will be loved by some and hated by others. Recruits are taught to be fair and just, and they're hit with the cold, hard fact that some of them may not make it to see retirement alive.Recruits stand ready for inspection.Training begins with instruction on local, state, and federal law. The recruits are taught only the very basics in areas such as search and seizure, arrest, liquor laws, and motor vehicle laws. This portion of the training lasts for approximately forty hours, and the recruits take a written test at the end of the week — the first of many weekly tests. Recruits must pass each written exam with a perfect score of 100 percent. If a recruit receives anything less than the required 100 percent, she's given two additional attempts to correctly answer each missed question. If, after the third try, her final score is still less than perfect, the recruit is immediately expelled from the academy, resulting in the loss of her job. The pressure to perform is tremendous.ACADEMY COURSESPolice academies vary depending on their local jurisdictions, but the schedule of classes for most academies is similar to the following schedule.INTRODUCTION TO LAW ENFORCEMENTOrientation to Basic TrainingNote Taking and Study HabitsHistory of Law EnforcementPolice Ethics and Moral IssuesPolice Authority and DiscretionThe Criminal Justice SystemPOLICE AND THE LAWConstitutional LawState Liquor LawsCivil LiabilityState Criminal LawLaws of EvidenceLaws of ArrestSearch and SeizureSearch Warrant PreparationUse of ForceHunting LawsWeapons and PermitsCourtroom Testimony and DemeanorMock TrialPRACTICAL POLICE SKILLSFirearmsShooting DecisionsTactical Use of WeaponsFirst-Responder CourseWater SafetyOfficer Safety/Mechanics of Arrest, Restraint, and ControlHandcuffingDefensive TacticsPolice Baton TrainingO.C. (Pepper) SprayPractical Skills DayDriver TrainingPhysical FitnessHUMAN RELATIONSHuman Behavior/Interpersonal RelationsStress ManagementPolice and the PublicState Juvenile Law/Dealing With JuvenilesSuicide Recognition, Management, and InterventionSupervisor-Subordinate RelationsSubstance Abuse IssuesCareer DevelopmentVictim/Witness AdvocacyLaw Enforcement and Citizens With Special NeedsConflict ManagementCultural Awareness and DiversityCRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONPrinciples of InvestigationCrime Scene ProcessingInterviewing Techniques and SkillsAdmissions and Confessions/Criminal StatementsFingerprintingPhotographySurveillanceAlcohol, Tobacco, and FirearmsExplosives and Incendiary DevicesIdentification and Handling of DrugsNarcotic Field TestingCriminalisticsSexual Assault/Rape CrisisCounterfeitingGambling and Organized CrimeCase PreparationInformants and IntelligenceMotor Vehicle TheftChild AbuseIdentification of SuspectsArson AwarenessDeath CasesCrimes Against PeopleCrimes Against PropertyPATROL PROCEDURESAccident InvestigationCommunity PolicingCrime PreventionCrimes in ProgressBuilding SearchStopping Suspicious Persons/SuspectsHandling AnimalsCrowd Control and Civil DisorderDomestic ViolenceHazardous MaterialsElectrical EmergenciesPrinciples and Operation of RadarImpaired DrivingBreathalyzer/Intoxilyzer 5000 CertificationMotor Vehicle Law and EnforcementRadio and Telephone Procedures10 CodesDiplomatic ImmunitiesVehicle Stop TacticsLow-Risk StopsHigh-Risk StopsCivil Complaints and ServiceNote-Taking and Report WritingRoadblocksK-9 TeamsSeized PropertyTraffic Direction and ControlGangsPolice academy coursework is grouped by subject and is normally taught in weeklong blocks. As with any other type of classroom training, recruits can become quite bored while sitting behind a desk for hours each day. However, there are certain subjects and practical exercises that can be quite entertaining, and they're a welcome break to the long days spent in warm classrooms.DUI/DWI TRAININGAs demanding as it is, even academy life has its better days, like the week of Breathalyzer or Intoxilyzer5000 certification, when half the class spends a day getting drunk and the other half tests them for intoxication at various stages of drunkenness. The two groups switch places on the following day, and those with the hangovers now conduct the testing. After weeks of arduous training, these two days are a great stress reliever.I should mention that many patrol vehicles wound up being driven home by drunken recruits at the conclusion of each of those days. The idea of driving a police car while drunk was cool — playing with the lights and sirens — but I look back on this dangerous and foolish exercise and wonder if these days are the beginning of the high substance-abuse rate among police officers. I should also mention that this particular exercise isn't practiced at all police academies.The DUI/DWI training continues as the recruits conduct mock traffic stops of intoxicated drivers. Some academies use volunteers to represent drunk drivers. These volunteers are often off-duty police officers, attorneys, academy instructors, and even civilians. They consume alcoholic beverages in varied proportions and the recruits carry out the necessary procedures to apprehend and arrest drivers who are under the influence of either alcohol or drugs.Prior to actual contact with a drunken subject, recruits are taught the various means of detecting a person who's driving under the influence. For instance, they're taught to look for certain behaviors, such as crossing the center line of the highway, weaving within the traffic lane, excessive braking, driving on the shoulder of the road, stopping too far away from a crossing where a stop sign or traffic light is present, running red lights or stop signs, and hesitating before or not dimming bright headlights when meeting oncoming traffic.OFFICER SURVIVALWeeks pass, and recruits see their waistlines become slimmer as their endurance to physical exercise becomes greater. Their attitudes change. The class as a whole takes on the persona of a tightly knit family, each member of which would do almost anything for the others. They help each other through tough times. They study together, eat together, run together, relax together, and sweat together. They learn that they need each other to survive. Cops are taught early on to depend on one another for everything. A bond is made in the police academy that can almost never be broken.Survival is a word that's drilled into the heads of academy recruits. They're taught that they'll survive no matter what kind of situations they're forced into. During the weeks of practical exercises, instructors set up staged scenarios both day and night, in which the recruits are placed into every situation imaginable, such as shootouts with armed robbers, assaults, sniper fire, fistfights, and stabbings. At every phase of the exercises, their teachers methodically and monotonously repeat the phrase, “You will survive.”Police training is based on repetition. Recruits are made to practice each exercise or drill over and over again, much like an animal being trained to perform a trick. These repetitive exercises are designed to cause the recruit to revert to her training — reacting instinctively and without contemplation — during stressful or emergency situations. The split second it takes to gather one's thoughts and then pull a gun in self-defense can be the difference between life and death. At the conclusion of each exercise, the recruits are graded on their performance and their ability to react appropriately for each situation.At the close of each day of academy training comes the dreaded physical training. Recruits run miles upon miles during the many weeks of training, and they perform thousands of sit-ups and push-ups. Stamina, perseverance, and control of emotions are pushed to their limits by this point in time, but nothing they've gone through yet can compare to the week of defensive tactics training, otherwise referred to as Hell Week.DEFENSIVE TACTICSHell Week is the forty-hour defensive tactics training period. During this course of instruction, recruits are taught how to defend themselves from attackers and how to subdue unruly suspects. They're taught proper handcuffing and arrest techniques, effective uses of nonlethal weapons, and personal-weapon retention.Police officer defensive tactics techniques are based on the pain compliance techniques of the martial arts. The Japanese martial art of Aikido and the Chinese martial art of Chin Na are two of the styles used to develop those skills. Chin Na means to seize (Chin) and lock (Na). Aikido, the more modern of the two martial arts, is defined as a union of universal energy, way, and harmony. Both styles focus on controlling an attacker by locking the joints and redirecting the attacker's energy. Pain is the force behind both.To truly learn the effectiveness of each technique, recruits must practice, and demonstrate, the painful procedures on their partners. The pain that one experiences from the application of these practical exercises is truly excruciating.Officers practice wrist-control techniques.When the Kotegaeshi Nage (wrist turnout) technique is correctly applied, the officer's thumb is placed on the underside of the wrist and acts as a lever. The other four fingers apply pressure to the joint.Each recruit must successfully display his ability to perform the required techniques on both armed and unarmed attackers, and on arrest suspects. Four of the basic techniques, the wrist turnout (Kotegaeshi Nage), the twisting wrist lock (Sankyo), the gooseneck lock (Kote Mawashi), and the straight-arm bar (Ikkyo) must be learned and learned well. Other movements, techniques, and procedures are derived from these four basic fundamental maneuvers.Each technique is practiced through repetition and normally begins with both the recruit and suspect in a standing position. A correctly performed technique ends with the criminal's hands safely handcuffed behind his back. The recruit can accomplish this from either a standing position or by performing a complete takedown to the floor, whichever the situation requires. The most effective means of subduing and handcuffing an unruly subject is for the recruit to force the suspect to the ground and hold him in a control technique.Using a combination wrist lock and arm bar, the recruit forces his partner to the ground. From this position, the recruit can easily move the controlled hand to the small of the suspect's back and apply handcuffs.Throughout Hell Week, the recruits repeatedly strike each other with batons and fists and stretch their opponents' joints to the maximum. They toss their partners around, throw them to the floor, and handcuff them over and over again. They're kicked, pushed, pulled, and slapped, and they spray each other with pepper spray. They must also learn to disarm criminals who are wielding knives, handguns, and shotguns. They do whatever it takes to simulate any possible scenario a police officer may encounter during the course of a shift. The good guy must always win.No matter how grueling a day of Hell Week training may be, and no matter how tired the recruits may be, when the day is over, with body parts still sore and aching, the recruits still have to run, and they still have to exercise.DRIVER TRAININGDriver training is in direct contrast to Hell Week. This week of driving a police car at top speeds through obstacle courses is a fun week for most of the recruits. It's almost like spending several fun-filled days at an adult theme park. This is the first time most of the recruits experience driving with lights and sirens going at full blast. They take turns chasing one another at speeds sometimes more than one hundred miles per hour. It's the first taste of a real action-packed street experience for the anxious officers-to-be.An abandoned airport runway is often the stage for police driver training. The near-mile-long stretches of pavement are dotted with hundreds of orange traffic cones that are placed into various patterns to simulate city streets, highways, and parking lots.To assure the practice sessions are safe, each recruit is required to wear a crash helmet and a seat belt. The car's tires are overinflated to prevent the rubber from separating from the metal rims in case a driver loses control of her vehicle at a high rate of speed. A car that's sliding sideways on a rim without a tire can overturn quite easily. The metal wheel gouges into the pavement, causing the vehicle to stop abruptly and the car's momentum tips it over. The overinflation of the vehicle's tires allows the rubber to tightly grip the rim and causes the car to slide and spin like a top instead of turning over.In case of an emergency, and for further safety, a police driver-training instructor rides with each recruit at all times. All recruits must spin their cars out of control at some point during the driver-training portion of the academy so they can learn the correct way to regain control of their vehicles.Some academies have the recruits attempt to maneuver their cars on a “skid pad,” a section of pavement covered with water or a slippery substance, such as a mixture of water and transmission fluid. The slimy, pinkish-red fluid simulates an icy surface. Instructors sometimes aim large streams of water from fire hoses at the recruit's windshield to reduce his visibility as he attempts to make his way across the skid pads.Some academies, such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation training academy in Quantico, Virginia, use specially designed skid cars on these unique driver courses. A skid car has an extra wheel at each of the four corners of the training vehicle. These wheels are attached to hydraulic cylinders which, when activated, raise the car off of the ground a few inches to render the car's normal wheels inoperable. The use of skid cars allows recruits to experience the sensation of losing control of a vehicle.Recruits are taught to drive with their hands at the 10 and 2 positions on the steering wheel, and they're instructed never to cross one hand over the other; instead, they're taught to “feed the wheel” from one hand to the other as they turn. They learn to repeatedly tap the breaks when attempting to stop or slow down from high rates of speed, such as during pursuit driving. Brake pads get very hot from the friction caused by constantly applying pressure to the brake pedal.Overheated brake pads reduce a vehicle's ability to stop. This “stab and jab” method, as it's called by some older instructors, reduces the amount of friction to the brake pads and allows them to cool down a bit between braking periods. The practice also prevents brakes from “locking up,” which can cause a vehicle to skid out of control. Cars today are equipped with antilock breaking systems that are designed to automatically “stab and jab” when the need arises, especially on wet pavement.Recruits are taught that most suspects who flee from the police during high-speed chases almost always make right-hand turns, but instructors throw in several left turns on the pre-staged courses to keep the recruits alert. Recruits are also trained to never follow the taillights of another car in case the vehicle that's being chased runs off the road or crashes. Officers have been known to follow a crook's car into ravines, ditches, lakes, and even into the path of oncoming cars. Instead, officers should always follow the course of the road and stay far enough behind the suspect vehicle to allow for emergency maneuvering and braking.As dangerous as all this sounds, it's not unusual to hear giggles and laughter coming from inside a recruit's car as it spins violently out of control. Even rough-and-tough cops enjoy a good rollercoaster ride.The recruits must complete each of the courses within a specified time limit and must achieve a satisfactory score on their driver tests. Time limits and acceptable scores vary for different academies and jurisdictions. As difficult as it is to avoid doing so, striking the traffic cones with the vehicle isn't permitted; if, at any time, a cone is struck, points are deducted from the driver's final score. The worst drivers of the group easily stand out, because their cars display many well-earned battle scars. When a cone is struck, the orange color rubs off, leaving a telltale mark on the car's paint.Final practical testing is done on the last days of driver training week. Recruits who have received failing scores are allowed a final attempt to achieve a satisfactory grade after all other trainees have completed their testing. It's a daunting experience to gaze down a mile-long stretch of pavement at hundreds of traffic cones, knowing that a group of inanimate objects is standing in the way of a lifelong dream. Those who fail on their final effort are sent home to join the ranks of the unemployed.During this week of training, the prevailing message to the recruits is again, no matter how dangerous the situation, they'll survive.TRAFFIC DIRECTIONDirecting traffic is a task that looks quite easy until an officer walks into a busy intersection for the first time and faces ten or twelve lanes of honking, fume-spewing, tire-squealing cars driven by tired, angry, and impatient drivers. I've heard a few well-seasoned officers comment that it's safer to be in a gun battle than to direct traffic.Recruits are taught the proper methods and procedures of traffic direction, and they're schooled on what to expect when they finally set foot in a busy intersection. Then, in full uniform with brand new whistles, they're sent into an actual intersection with real traffic — sometimes even at night. Occasionally, but not often, an instructor has to untangle a mess when a nervous recruit has signaled for several opposing lanes of traffic to all proceed at once.MOCK COURTAnother interesting and fun session for most recruits is the time spent learning to testify properly in a court of law. Recruits are taught courtroom procedures and what to say and when to say it — mainly, they're taught only to speak when spoken to. After the course, the recruits are given the opportunity to sharpen their skills in an actual courtroom setting. The recruits each participate in a mock trial. The trial is normally carried out with real attorneys and experienced officers who portray defendants, attorneys, and judges. The mock trials are sometimes videotaped to allow recruits to observe their individual performances.GRADUATION DAYFinally, after many weeks of grueling studies and with muscles wracked with pain, the recruits reach graduation day. They march into a banquet hall or auditorium, dressed in their best Class-A uniforms, to receive their diplomas. Some receive special awards for top academic achievements, top shooting, and top driving. At the end of the ceremony, the realization hits — they're now real police officers.FIELD TRAININGAfter graduation from the academy, each officer is required to complete many hours of field training, with a certified field training officer (FTO). Some departments mandate a field training period of up to four hundred hours. The field training program was developed by the San Jose, California, Police Department and is now the standard for most FTO programs in the country. With the field training period complete, the officer moves on to his individual assignment, which for nearly all new officers is an assignment as a patrol officer, and begins the day-in, day-out routine of answering complaints and calls. For eight hours every day, the officer responds to drunk and disorderliness, domestic disputes, fight calls, stray dogs, he said-she saids, burglaries, robberies, shots fired, false alarms, speeders, drunk drivers, child abusers, bad-check writers, and shoplifters. The next day, the routine begins all over again — nine times out of ten with the same suspects.
