---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0008.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["police", "department", "officer", "state", "sheriff", "law", "city", "chief", "within", "office", "candidate", "also", "training", "county", "enforcement", "must", "deputy", "agency", "responsible", "security", "crime", "authority", "normally", "criminal", "area"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0008html

---


1
1
LAW ENFORCEMENT IN AMERICA
The crust that oftentimes develops around the men and women of law enforcement is the result of years of seeing the worst in the worst of people — and the worst in the best of people. Still, they remain ever ready to stand in the gap between all people and those who would do them harm. Moreover, beneath that crust, flashes of tenderness can often be seen — tears pooled in the hardest eyes, comfort whispered in the ears of victims — especially when children are involved. Essentially, while flawed, most are remarkable men and women who run toward danger when others run away.
— SHEILA L. STEPHENS, WRITER, SPEAKER, CONSULTANT, AND FORMER ATF SPECIAL AGENT
Today in America, there are many law enforcement agencies, but they all fall under the control of a local, state, or federal governing body. It's important for police officers to know that it often becomes necessary for more than one police department to join forces while investigating a crime. In order for police officers to effectively work with other police departments, they must first understand how each of those departments operates.
The first days of a police officer's career are spent in a classroom, learning about local government and how police departments were established. They learn the differences between federal law enforcement agencies, state police, county sheriffs' offices, and city, town, and village police departments. New recruits are taught that each department operates independently, with none having authority over the other.
To better understand how police departments and sheriffs' offices function, officers must first learn how individual states, counties, cities, towns, and villages are structured.
CITY, TOWN, AND VILLAGE POLICE
Not every municipality has a population large enough to be considered a city. Depending on the area or state, smaller urban areas are usually labeled towns or villages. In the United States, cities are specific areas that have separate governing bodies and power apart from the state where they're located. Most cites operate under a charter — a locally written constitution.
Cities operating without a charter are known as statutory forms of government and are organized and authorized by state laws. City mayors and council members are elected by the citizens of that city, and the laws and ordinances of the city are approved by the voters living within its geographical boundaries, or jurisdiction.
Towns and villages are generally smaller than cities, both in land area and population. That size difference reduces the amount of funds available for community services such as water, sewer, waste removal, and police, fire and rescue operations.
Towns and villages normally have the option of operating their own police departments. Sometimes a department consists of a single officer. Maintaining a police department isn't cheap — in 2003, the average nationwide cost (salary, uniforms, and benefits) for a municipality to employ a single police officer was $93,300, or approximately $200 per U.S. resident. Towns and villages that can't afford to maintain the costs associated with a police department rely on the county sheriff's office and the state police to enforce the laws of their area.
SHERIFFS' OFFICES VS. POLICE DEPARTMENTS
The difference between a sheriff's office and a police department can be confusing. While we'll go over each in great detail throughout this chapter, keep this caveat in mind: Every city, town, or village must have a sheriff's office. A police department, however, is not a must-have department. Because of this, it's actually possible for cities and counties to have both sheriffs' offices and police departments. It all comes down to the laws of the individual areas.
A police chief is appointed by city, town, or village officials and is responsible for maintaining the peace and enforcing the law within his jurisdiction.
On the other hand, a sheriff is elected to office by popular vote and is the chief executive and administrative officer of a county — she has supreme authority in all jurisdictions within her county. A sheriff's principal duties involve aiding all criminal and civil courts within the county, serving civil process (delivering civil papers such as subpoenas and eviction notices), maintaining the jail, and serving jury summonses. A sheriff is the chief conservator of the peace in the county where she serves; therefore, she may also be responsible for the enforcement of all laws. Sheriffs have the authority to appoint deputy sheriffs to assist them in carrying out their duties.
Normally, a police chief doesn't have the authority to serve legal documents, such as civil warrants. In some areas the local government may have sworn in their police chief as a sheriff so she may have the authority to do the work of a sheriff. In fact, many cities have a city sheriff in addition to a county sheriff who also has jurisdiction within the city in addition to a police chief. (Clear as mud, right?) It just depends on what local law dictates. For example, in the state of Virginia, no police officer has any power or any authority in civil matters. That's a function of the sheriff's office.
Now, let's take a closer look at each type of law enforcement agency.
POLICE DEPARTMENTS
Modern police departments in the United States function much like our nation's military. Due to the increased intelligence, organization, and education of modern criminals, police departments have become more military-like than ever before — so much so that they're often referred to as paramilitary organizations. To keep up with the advanced techniques used by today's criminals, police departments have had to step up the training they give their officers, and they've had to increase their weaponry to match or exceed the firepower of outlaws. To effectively battle crime, police departments must maintain strict order. To assure that rules and regulations are followed, police departments adhere to military-style chains of command.
Chief Jon D. Zeliff of the Central Point, Oregon, Police Department, wears two stars on his uniform to indicate his rank as chief of police.
A police chief heads up a city, town, or village police department. The chief is responsible for all law enforcement operations within the jurisdictions under his control. Since there's no actual line painted on the ground to identify the city's perimeter, the law in most areas gives a chief and his officers legal authority to exceed that boundary by a predetermined distance when preserving the peace and making a lawful arrest. The three-hundred-yard allowance in the Commonwealth of Virginia is an example of a jurisdiction that extends beyond a city's actual limits.
Police chiefs are hired and supervised by a city council, a city manager, and a mayor. They work at the behest of this ruling body and can be dismissed by them at any time. Most of a police chief's major decisions, especially the purchases of costly or nonbudgeted items, must be approved by his superiors. In addition, the council controls the budget of the city, town, and village police departments, which limits a chief's power and authority. Police Chief Bernard Richardson of Virginia sums up his department's financial woes this way:
Funding is the worst problem I have facing me. Our budget is the largest departmental budget of the city, so it's the first to give up something. Police vehicles are thought to be an area where there could be cuts without any problems.
Police officers wear pins or insignias on their collars to identify their individual rank within the department. Police chiefs wear the gold stars of a general or a gold colonel's eagle on their lapels, which signifies they are their department's top-ranking officers. The individual police chief normally chooses which style uniform and which rank insignia to wear and normally prefers to be addressed as either “chief” or “colonel.”
Chief Neil Ferdelman of the Hamilton, Ohio, Police Department describes how he came to choose the colonel's insignia:
Ego, or more kindly, the size of the organization, dictates the rank. Most major cities use a star or a number of stars because they have more ranks. Midsize to smaller jurisdiction chiefs usually use the colonel insignia, although I've seen village police chiefs with stars. Our chief's rank is set by policy. When I'm in uniform, I wear the colonel's insignia, which has been worn by chiefs here for all my thirty years in this organization.
The second-in-command of a police department is either a major or a captain. This distinction usually depends on the size of the particular department — larger agencies sometimes employ one or more majors. This officer is usually in charge of administrative duties such as payroll and personnel issues and directly supervises all lower-level heads of the various divisions. A major is identified by a gold maple leaf on each lapel.
Directly below majors in the chain of command are captains, who display double, parallel gold bars — nicknamed “railroad tracks” — on their collars. A captain is responsible for overseeing the day-to-day operations of the police department, such as shift assignments and training schedules. A captain manages shift supervisors — lieutenants or sergeants — who in turn directly supervise the remaining workforce, such as the detective divisions, patrol divisions, K-9 units, bicycle patrols, and special operations like undercover teams and special weapons and tactics (SWAT) units.
Lieutenants wear a single bar on their collars; sergeants display three stripes on their sleeves and collars; corporals sport two stripes. Officers who wear a single stripe on their collars and sleeves have a ranking equal to a private in the military. These officers are referred to as officers or line officers. Line officers respond to 911 calls and criminal complaints made by citizens. They also conduct routine patrols of neighborhoods and business districts to proactively thwart crime.
An officer without any rank insignia is usually a rookie, someone who's recently graduated from the police academy and is working toward completing a four-hundred-hour field training program. These rookie officers ride with a field training officer for the duration of that program.
Other pins, medals, and ribbons worn by police officers can denote an officer's number of years of service, good conduct, marksmanship, medals of valor, and special awards deemed appropriate by the department.
Patrol supervisor's vehicle.
Supervisors and detectives wear gold badges. Rank-and-file officers wear silver badges. A white uniform shirt normally indicates that an officer has supervisor status. Some departments letter the side of patrol vehicle doors with the words sergeant, lieutenant, or captain to indicate to the public that the driver is a shift supervisor. Since nearly all patrol cars within a department look the same, these reflective letters are excellent indicators to the night-shift patrol officers that their boss is approaching. This allows the officers ample time to appear busy with last-minute paperwork instead of reading their favorite crime novels while waiting for the next speeder.
POLICE DEPARTMENT HIRING PROCESS
Today's police officer candidates must be in excellent health; have near-perfect corrected or noncorrected vision; and have no physical disabilities that would hinder the performance of their duties. They must have at least a high school diploma or equivalent, and they must be a minimum of twenty-one years of age but not over the age of thirty-five. Some departments will waive the upper age limit if the candidate is highly qualified or is already a police officer from another agency. A large number of police departments lean toward hiring college graduates, and some municipalities offer monetary incentives to officers who complete their college educations while employed with the police department.
Candidates must undergo a thorough background investigation, which is normally conducted by investigators from the detective division or detectives within the internal affairs department. The investigators visit and question the candidate's neighbors, friends, family members, pastors, and former employers and teachers. Conversations with people who are close to the potential officer can offer great insight into the candidate's character and abilities.
Candidates with felony records can't become police officers. Most departments won't hire anyone with a criminal record of any kind, including misdemeanors. Investigators check Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and local computer files for any documentation of criminal activity by the candidate. Detectives also obtain a copy of the candidate's credit report, because a person with a poor credit history is thought to have organizational troubles and not be the type of person who'll make a good police officer. The investigators print a copy of the candidate's driver record. They examine this record for any signs of problematic or habitual behavior, such as excessive speeding and reckless driving.
The investigating officers place the documentation of the three reports — the criminal history, the credit report, and the driver record — into what is now a rapidly growing file. Some departments also require the candidate to undergo a polygraph examination, or lie-detector test.
At this stage of the hiring process, it's not unusual for investigating detectives to discover that a candidate is wanted by the police in another jurisdiction, is a spouse or child abuser, is a drug addict, is delinquent in child support or taxes, or is a convicted felon. The foolhardy candidate with an outstanding arrest warrant is promptly taken into custody. She's then held in jail until appropriate authorities arrive to transport her to the jurisdiction in which she's wanted.
A candidate who successfully passes the background examination must undergo a battery of testing. He must pass a lengthy, written aptitude exam that requires knowledge of basic math, science, language skills, and excellent reasoning and memory skills.
If the candidate successfully passes the aptitude test, he takes a psychological test to determine whether he's mentally and morally suitable for the job. The psychological tests are designed to weed out candidates who exhibit even the slightest signs of socially deviant behavior. Test-takers are also required to respond to questions regarding lying, cheating, and stealing. The tests leave little room for error. I recall one question that asked candidates if they'd ever taken as much as a paper clip from a former place of employment.
Dr. Laurence Miller, a clinical, forensic, and police psychologist and the author of Practical Police Psychology: Stress Management and Crisis Intervention for Law Enforcement, explains the need for the psychological testing of police officer candidates:
Police officers are charged with the responsibility of making life-and-death decisions in a short period of time under dangerous and stressful circumstances. It's understandable, then, that some form of psychological screening for basic mental stability and judgment be a regular part of the recruitment process for new officers.
The next rounds of tests are assessments of the candidate's physical strength, stamina, and agility. The candidate is required to run long distances, perform as many push-ups and sit-ups as she can within a specified time frame, jump over ditches, crawl under barriers, and effectively drag a life-size, 150-pound dummy over and through a short obstacle course. The tests are the same for both male and female candidates.
Finally, the candidate who successfully makes it through the rigorous testing process is brought before a review panel for a face-to-face interview. The panel consists of ranking officers from the department, members of the city council, possibly the mayor or mayor's representative, and sometimes people selected from the general public. Each member of the review panel questions the candidate. At the end of the interviews, the panel makes its recommendation to the officer in charge of hiring — usually a major, captain, or police chief.
The successful candidate is notified within a few days about when he's to report for his uniform and bullet-resistant vest fitting. The recruit is also given a date to report to work, his shift assignment, and his date to report to the police academy. Police academies normally offer basic officer training either once or twice a year, so a recruit could actually work for several months before receiving formal academy training. In these instances the recruit is usually paired with a certified field training officer until the date of his scheduled training.
In order for a recruit to make a lawful arrest, she must first raise her right hand and swear an oath promising to uphold the laws of the United States, the state where she's employed, and her local jurisdiction. Once this ceremony has been completed, the recruit is considered a sworn officer. Civilian employees of police departments, such as clerical workers, records clerks, computer technicians, and some crime scene technicians and criminalists aren't sworn officers and have no powers of arrest.
SHERIFFS' OFFICES
As noted at the start of this chapter, a sheriff is an officer of the court who's elected by the voting public of a county. Sheriffs normally serve a term of four years, and it's not uncommon for a sheriff to hold office for several terms. Sheriffs are constitutional officers — their positions are created by a constitution, not by legislation — and they have no supervisors other than voters.
The responsibilities of a sheriff are a bit more complex than those of a police chief. A police chief is only responsible for the enforcement of local, state, and federal laws and for the protection of citizens and their property. A sheriff is not only accountable for the enforcement of those same laws, but he's also charged with the service (delivery) of criminal and civil documents, courtroom security, jail and lockup operations, prisoner transports, and the supervision of deputies who are law enforcement officers. Sheriffs also have authority in the county in which they were elected, and in all cities, towns, and villages located within that county. This means that, even though a city has its own police force, county sheriffs and their deputies have jurisdiction in that city and can make a lawful arrest there.
Even though all deputies wear the designated uniforms of their departments, not all deputy sheriffs are police officers. Deputies assigned to work in county or city jails are corrections officers, sometimes referred to as jailers. Their training is very similar to the training received by guards who work in the state and federal prison systems. Their sole duties are to supervise inmate activity and maintain order and security within the jail facility.
Deputies working in county and city courthouses are courtroom security officers and are trained to serve as bailiffs and to provide protection for court employees and judges. They're also responsible for the safety of trial evidence, witnesses, jurors, and prisoners within the courthouse.
Deputies who travel the countryside delivering court papers such as jury summonses, lien notices, divorce papers, and eviction notices are called process servers. These deputies, through the authority of the court and the sheriff, are also responsible for the eviction of delinquent renters and people whose property's been foreclosed on by banks and mortgage companies.
The training for jailers, courtroom security officers, and process servers is limited to their areas of expertise. They don't attend police academies and aren't certified police officers. Some sheriffs' offices cross-train their deputies so they may be certified to work in two or more areas of the department.
The ranking structure for a sheriff's office is similar to that of a police department, with the exception of the second-in-command. The person who serves directly under the sheriff is the chief deputy who, like her police department counterpart, normally holds the rank of either a major or captain. It's the chief deputy's responsibility to assume charge of the department in the sheriff's absence. The chief deputy is responsible for managing the entire department until either the sheriff returns to duty or, in the event of his death, until an election is held to name a new sheriff. The judge of the highest court within the jurisdiction may appoint the chief deputy, someone else from within the department, or someone from the community as acting sheriff until the next election.
The chief deputy reports to the sheriff and is the direct supervisor of all department heads. Each division supervisor — normally a captain — is responsible for the operation of the various subdivisions within the sheriff's office. These captains oversee the operation of the county jails, courts and courtroom security, civil process, police patrols, detective and traffic divisions, jail medical departments, and inmate transportation.
The administration of county jails is an enormous responsibility. These facilities are subject to the same rules, laws, and procedures as state prisons — a few have inmate populations with numbers equal to some prisons. The deputies who supervise these facilities are sometimes called jail administrators, and some are even called wardens. They're not only responsible for the supervision of around-the-clock staff but for the control and well-being of the jail inmates as well.
The jail administrators must ensure that prisoners' rights are protected, that they're properly fed and exercised, that their religious beliefs and activities aren't restricted, and that security isn't compromised at any time. They're also responsible for inmate transportation to the various courts and to medical appointments for needs that can't be addressed by the jail's medical staff, such as surgery. If a jail inmate is required to stay in the hospital, around-the-clock security must be provided; therefore, at least two deputies per shift are normally assigned to guard the prisoner. Most hospitals are equipped with special security wings or floors that are designed to house prisoners. It's also the duty of the jail administrator to oversee the hospital security assignments.
To assist with this daunting responsibility, jail administrators have shift supervisors who report to them. Shift supervisors are normally lieutenants or sergeants, and it's their primary duty to oversee the day-to-day activities of the inmates and to supervise all jail deputies.
Majors or captains in charge of the police department divisions within each sheriff's office manage all patrol units, detective divisions, K-9 squads, and SWAT teams. Each shift supervisor — the lieutenant or sergeant — oversees the line officers of his unit.
Large sheriffs' offices sometimes utilize substations located in various areas inside the county limits. Each subdivision is supervised by a commanding officer who reports directly to an administrative major or captain within the main sheriff's office.
Courtroom security and civil process divisions are managed by a supervisor who sees to it that the deputies carry out their duties in the timely manner prescribed by law. These supervisors also are also the sheriff's liaisons to the courts, judges, and attorneys.
SHERIFF'S OFFICE HIRING PROCESS
Since sheriffs are elected into office, they can't be fired for any reason. The only way to remove an elected sheriff from office is through impeachment or a new election. Sheriffs' deputies are appointed, not hired, by the sheriff, and they can be legally dismissed at any time without cause or reason. The qualifications to become a sheriff in many areas of the country are modest. Normally, a candidate needs only be eligible to vote in the community where she's seeking office and to have lived in that community for at least one year. Prior law enforcement experience isn't a requirement.
Ohio is one of the few states in the country that requires a candidate for sheriff to be a sworn police officer. He must also be certified to carry a firearm and have at least a two-year college degree. All sheriff candidates are also required to submit to a thorough background investigation.
Candidates for the position of deputy sheriff can be subjected to the same intense background investigation and testing procedure as applicants for city police departments, but since they're political appointees, this practice isn't always carried out — especially for candidates who are friends or family of the sheriff.
STATE POLICE
The first law enforcement agency with statewide jurisdiction was the Texas Rangers. In the early 1800s, ten men were employed to protect the area around a Texas colony from Indians. This group of men furnished their own guns, horses, and supplies, and they worked for just over one dollar a day while enforcing their unwritten policy of “Shoot first and ask questions later.”
When the Rangers waged a war against the Cherokee Indians, they quickly developed a reputation for their aggressive and often brutal style of law enforcement. They continued that same vicious style of fighting in the Battle of Plum Creek with the Comanche Indians. This style of law enforcement earned them worldwide recognition during the Mexican War.
After the Texas Rangers, the first professionally organized state police department was the Pennsylvania State Constabulary, an agency that was actually formed to quell the state's coal miners' strikes. Soon other states began to follow suit and formed their own state police departments.
Today, each state has its own police department that's responsible for enforcing the laws of that state, as well as the laws of the United States. State police officers (also called State Troopers or Highway Patrol) have jurisdiction in any city or county within the state where they're employed. They're also authorized to make arrests for any crime that's committed within the state. In most areas, the state police are primarily responsible for enforcing traffic laws; however, they have their own fully functional criminal investigative divisions, undercover investigators, crime labs, and crime scene technicians and equipment. They also assist local departments when needed.
State police departments normally have one large, central center of operations located in the state's capital. The state is divided into districts, each having a district headquarters that's responsible for several counties. Some state police departments have smaller field offices located within the individual counties.
The Virginia State Police (VSP) has grown from a one-man department that began in the early 1900s to a department that's currently over three thousand strong. In the early days, Virginia troopers patrolled a highway system of dirt roads that had a maximum speed limit of fifteen miles per hour. One hundred years later, the VSP is responsible for patrolling nearly 30 million miles of highway while responding to well over 1.25 million incidents annually.
In 1922, Virginia troopers, or inspectors as they were then called, earned around $1,500 annually. In 2006, a trooper's starting salary was over $33,000 with an additional benefits package worth approximately $26,000. They're also provided take-home patrol vehicles, which allow the troopers to respond quickly during emergencies.
At the onset of Virginia's state police department, a single plainclothes police inspector watched over a mere handful of automobiles traveling on seven miles of hard-surfaced roads. Troopers today are outfitted in handsome blue-and-gray uniforms styled after the colors of the Confederate and Union Armies — gray for the Confederate Army and blue for the Union.
In 2004, Virginia state police officers, for instance, responded to approximately 1.3 million incidents, and they investigated nearly 43,000 traffic accidents; made 65,000 traffic arrests and more than 21,000 criminal arrests; assisted police and sheriffs' offices more than 40,000 times; seized narcotics worth more than $130 million; and conducted 345 search-and-rescue missions. Each state's police department has a similar record of advancing with the times.
FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES
The U.S. Government employs more than 106,000 full-time, sworn law enforcement officers. Each of these officers carries firearms and may legally arrest criminals anywhere within the United States and its territories.
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
The primary law enforcement agency of the United States government is the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). The FBI was originally established in 1908 to defend the United States against attacks by terrorists and to enforce the criminal laws of the United States.
The responsibilities of the FBI have expanded greatly since its early days. Not only is the FBI the chief investigative arm of the federal government; today's agents are assigned many duties, such as assisting local and state agencies with laboratory testing, narcotics trafficking, and Internet and cyber investigations. The FBI also assists in protecting the civil rights of American citizens and maintains the Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS) — an electronic exchange of fingerprint identification.
The FBI operates its own training academy at the U.S. Marine Corps Base in Quantico, Virginia. New agent trainees — NATS — receive 643.5 hours (17 weeks) of intensive basic training. During their training, NATS divide their time between the classroom and practical, hands-on exercises. As weeks go by, NATS are expected to improve on their strength and stamina. They're given physical training tests during the first, seventh, and fourteenth weeks to determine their individual progress in performing sit-ups, push-ups, pull-ups, and distance running.
NATS practice their newly learned skills through repetition and role-playing. The training academy at Quantico features a mock town named Hogan's Alley, complete with buildings and city streets. This lifelike depiction of Anytown, USA, is where NATS are given the opportunity to come face-to-face with armed robbers, killers, and fleeing bandits — all of whom are instructors and actors role-playing as bad guys. NATS are assigned crimes to solve that have been “committed” within the city limits of Hogan's Alley. They're then graded on their ability to put their newly acquired skills to practical use.
NATS must undergo a rigorous schedule of defensive tactics training. They're graded on their expertise in grappling, handcuffing, takedown and control techniques, weapons retention, and suspect disarming. They must also complete driver training and a basic firearms course in which they're trained to fire an assortment of weapons.
During FBI firearms training, NATS must demonstrate the ability to properly handle and fire thousands of rounds of ammunition from each of the weapons used by the FBI, including a submachine gun.
The FBI operates fifty-six field offices with four hundred satellite offices within the United States. The bureau also maintains forty-five international offices called Legal Attaché offices, or Legats. These worldwide offices prevent foreign crime from making its way to the United States. The Legats work closely with their foreign hosts and don't conduct solo operations or intelligence gathering.
BUREAU OF ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, FIREARMS, AND EXPLOSIVES
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) was first established as a tax-collecting and law enforcement agency. Today, since the inception of the Homeland Security Bill, the law enforcement duties of the ATF have been assigned to the U.S. Department of Justice. The tax-collection functions of ATF remain under the control of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
ATF special agents follow a chain of command similar to the FBI, with field agents reporting to either an assistant special agent in charge or to the special agent in charge. Large-area field offices, called posts of duty, employ group supervisors who report to the agents in charge.
Agents receive basic and advanced training at one of the many Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers (FLETC) located throughout the country. The first FLETC was established in Glynco, Georgia, where many federal officers still receive their basic training.
Another FLETC located near Roswell, New Mexico, specializes in training courses for government agencies, including the ATF, the U.S. Border Patrol, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Federal Air Marshals, and the Transportation Security Administration. In addition, the New Mexico facility offers advanced certification training for driving, physical fitness, and firearms instructors.
There are many police agencies within the boundaries of the United States. Each of these agencies employs sworn police officers who are authorized to enforce the laws of the United States and of their individual bailiwicks.
OTHER FEDERAL POLICE AGENCIES
Bureau of Engraving and Printing Police
Department of Homeland Security
Diplomatic Security Service
Federal Protective Service
Federal Reserve Police
Hoover Dam Police
Internal Revenue Service
Museum Police Departments
National Institutes of Health Police
Pentagon Police Department
Tribal Police Departments
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
U.S. Coast Guard Police Department
U.S. Defense Protective Service
U.S. Department of Energy
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
U.S. Marshals Service
U.S. Mint Police
U.S. Park Police
U.S. Postal Police
U.S. Secret Service
Walter Reed Hospital Police
OTHER POLICE DEPARTMENTS
Some individual communities and most government agencies maintain their own police and/or security departments to preserve and protect individual laws and property. An example of a police department operating independently, but within the jurisdictional limits of another locality, is a college or university police department. In these cases, the physical locations of universities obviously lie within specific cities or counties that are normally policed by a city police department or a county sheriff's office. However, due to on-campus housing, large student populations, and the potential for criminal activity outside the normal course of duty for existing local departments, colleges have established their own individual police departments called campus police departments.
CAMPUS POLICE DEPARTMENTS
College campuses are sometimes large enough — housing student populations well into the thousands — to warrant having their own campus police departments. These police departments operate exactly as any city, town, or village police department, with the exception of their possible need for officers with a more sympathetic, understanding nature than is normally required. The quest for candidates who possess this desired trait makes the hiring process of a campus police department a little more difficult than its municipal counterparts.
College life presents a somewhat different type of criminal activity than is normally found in most cities and counties. The majority of the crimes committed on college campuses are crimes of a petty nature, such as vandalism, annoying phone calls, and larceny. Although fewer in number, crimes of a more serious nature do occur and are often crimes against a person, such as sexual assault and rape.
Campus police officers undergo the same training as officers with city, town, and village police departments. In fact, some campus police departments send their officers to the academies of those other departments. Campus police officers are sworn police officers. They're authorized to carry firearms and have the power to make arrests and serve warrants. A campus police officer's authority is limited to the geographical boundaries of the university where he's employed unless he's in pursuit of a fleeing felon.
CAPITOL POLICE DEPARTMENTS
Capitol police officers are responsible for the security of state-owned buildings located on state capitol property. These officers enforce the laws of their states, and they investigate all crimes that occur within their jurisdiction — all property owned by the state. They provide security for the governor, the lieutenant governor, the attorney general, state Supreme Court justices, members of the general assembly, and their families.
The U.S. Capitol Police, established in 1828 for the purpose of providing security for congressional buildings, is in charge of protecting the members of Congress, the Senate, the House of Representatives, and their families.
Capitol officers enforce traffic and criminal laws within all congressional buildings and property. During times of civil unrest capitol police officers must maintain order during demonstrations, protests, and rallies. They're also responsible for regaining control during riots. Other local and state police agencies are often called on to assist in these situations.
In the early days of the U.S. Capitol Police, officers earned meager salaries. Today, capitol police officers earn more than $50,000 annually along with a generous benefits package.
PORT AUTHORITY POLICE
Officers who are employed by port authorities enforce the laws of their respective states and localities. In addition to normal police activity — with the ever-present threat of terrorism in and around our nation's transportation hubs — port authority officers must be ever vigilant for terrorist-related activity.
GAME AND FISHERY DEPARTMENTS
Game wardens enforce the hunting, fishing, trapping, and boating laws of their respective states. They're authorized to arrest criminal suspects for any crime, and they have statewide authority and powers of arrest. Since these officers constantly patrol wooded areas, they're often assigned to state and local drug task forces, especially task forces that are responsible for marijuana eradication.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
Some states, such as Virginia, North Carolina, Washington, and Oregon, require that all alcohol-related sales be controlled by the state government. In fact, in some of these states, such as Virginia, citizens can only buy liquor by the bottle from a state-owned-and-operated store.
These states have special law enforcement agencies responsible for enforcing the state's alcohol laws. For example, the Virginia Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) manages more than three hundred ABC stores throughout the state. In 2005, Virginia's state-run ABC stores collected more than $268 million from alcohol sales.
The Virginia Department of ABC employs sworn police officers called ABC special agents. These agents have authority and arrest powers anywhere within the state.
ABC special agents monitor the sale of alcoholic beverages in stores, trains, airplanes, wineries, restaurants, and nightclubs. In many states laws mandate that all establishments selling alcoholic beverages must also serve hot food. In these states food must be sold in a predetermined ratio to the establishment's alcohol sales.
The sale of mixed beverages may also be prohibited in any nightclub commonly called a strip club where partial or full nudity is permitted. Undercover ABC agents often patrol these clubs searching for violations of the law. ABC agents may also be assigned to work with local and other state police departments for the purpose of investigating criminal activity, such as narcotics crimes and the manufacturing of illegal liquor (moonshine).
