---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_028.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["fire", "material", "explosive", "may", "heat", "gas", "fuel", "point", "investigator", "liquid", "origin", "victim", "co", "burn", "often", "level", "arson", "cause", "gasoline", "structure", "used", "oxygen", "death", "accelerants", "might"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit028html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 17 
ARSON 
 INVESTIGATION:
FIRES AND EXPLOSIONS  
Arson investigations are extremely difficult to conduct, and where explosions are involved, they become even trickier. The fundamental problem is that the crime scene and the evidence typically are severely damaged if not completely destroyed. Such is the nature of fire and explosives.
The investigator uses both physical and chemical evidence to determine if the fire was accidentally or intentionally set. Fires started by natural causes are rare, except as the result of lightning strikes.
THE NATURE OF FIRE  
Fire is almost a living, breathing entity. It consumes fuel materials and oxygen and produces heat and light. From a chemistry perspective this is called oxidation, which is when a substance combines with oxygen, or some other oxidant, to produce another substance. Oxidative reactions are characterized by a transfer of electrons from one molecule to another, a reaction that results in the release of energy. Such reactions are also termed exothermic, or energy-producing, reactions. In the case of fire, this energy is released as light and heat.
It may surprise you that the process of rust formation is also an oxidative process. In this case, iron (Fe) combines with oxygen (O2) to produce iron oxide (Fe2O3), or rust. This is an extremely slow process and may take months or years, and since it is so slow, no detectable heat or light is produced.
Fire is the same basic reaction, except that it occurs more rapidly. Fire results when a fuel source combines with oxygen in an oxidative reaction that produces light, heat, and various byproducts of combustion such as carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO2). When a fuel source such as methane gas (CH4), which is a flammable hydrocarbon (any compound composed of hydrogen and carbon atoms), burns, it combines with oxygen to produce water (H2O) and CO2. The equation for this reaction is:
CH4 + 2 O2 = CO2 + 2 H2O + heat and light  
One molecule of methane combines with two molecules of oxygen to produce one molecule of carbon dioxide and two molecules of water. Heat and light are byproducts of the reaction. An explosion is simply a violent and sudden version of this same process.
So, rusting, burning, and exploding are similar oxidative processes with the difference being the rate of the reaction.
But, simply bringing oxygen and a flammable fuel such as paper or gasoline together will not produce fire. Something else is needed. That something is heat. This triad—fuel, oxygen, and heat—must be present for a fire to begin. Remove any one of these and no fire will occur.
As you might expect, the removal or suppression of any of these will extinguish or slow a fire that is already in progress, while the addition of one or more will accelerate it. For example, spraying water on a fire extinguishes it because it lowers the temperature, blocks oxygen from reaching the fuel, and in some circumstances dilutes the fuel. This reduction in the three necessary components dampens or extinguishes the fire. On the other hand, adding gasoline or oxygen increases the fire’s intensity.
If the initiation of a fire requires heat, exactly how much is needed? It depends on the fuel.
The temperature at which fire starts is called the ignition temperature, and it varies widely from substance to substance. The ignition temperature for gasoline is quite different from that of wood. However, in the presence of oxygen, either will ignite when the proper amount of heat is applied. Once combustion occurs, the fire continues because the fire itself produces enough heat to continue the burning process. This is true of all exothermic, or heat-producing, reactions.
The fuel consumed in a fire can be solid, liquid, or gas. In structure fires of homes or other buildings, all three types of fuels are usually present, either as part of the structure or as an igniter or accelerant in the case of arson. Solids include wood, drapes, carpets, furniture, and roofing materials. Liquids could be gasoline, paint thinners, alcohol, or any other flammable substance. Gases could be natural gas or the vapors from any flammable liquid.
But, in order for any of these three general types of fuels to ignite, they must first be in a gaseous state. Put another way, flammable gases will ignite, but before solids or liquids can burn, they must be converted to a gas.
Fire requires that a gaseous fuel mix with the gaseous oxygen in air. It will then ignite when sufficient heat is present. With gases such as natural gas, this is self-evident, but what about liquid and solid fuels? With a liquid fuel, the applied heat must be sufficient to vaporize (turn into gas) the fuel. This temperature is called the flash point, the lowest temperature that will vaporize a liquid fuel. It varies from liquid to liquid. Gasoline possesses its characteristic odor because it is an extremely volatile liquid. You detect the odor when the vapors from the gasoline reach your nostrils. When gasoline catches fire, it is the vapors that are burning, not the liquid gasoline. The heat from the fire continually vaporizes the gasoline, thus supplying gaseous fuel to continue the burning.
The same is true for solids, which burn only when enough heat is applied to convert the solid to gas. This process is called pyrolysis. In the case of wood or paper, the heat turns the surface of these solids to a gas, which then can mix with oxygen and ignite. When you see wood burning, what you are actually seeing is the burning of a very thin layer of “wood gas” over the surface of the wood. If the temperature is too low for pyrolysis to take place, the solid may still burn. We call this smoldering. It is a slow flameless burn. But, add heat or oxygen and the smoldering burn might generate enough heat for the pyrolytic reaction to occur and the fuel will burst into flames. Blowing, fanning, or using a bellows to direct air at a fire causes a smoldering log to burst into flames, thus the term “fanning the flames.”
The bottom line is that neither solids nor liquids will burn openly. Only gases can intermingle with oxygen and ignite.
Spontaneous combustion is basically a self-starting fire. This rarely occurs because the conditions required are uncommon. A collection of rags soaked with certain oils and placed in a poorly ventilated container can combust spontaneously. The mechanism appears to be an accumulation of heat from the slow oxidation of the oils. If the heat rises to the ignition temperature of the oil, fire is likely to occur. Occasionally, home and industrial fires begin in this manner. More often, however, arsonists attempt to use this fairly rare occurrence as a defense.
Explosives are fuels that are capable of undergoing very rapid oxidation. These reactions are so rapid that the oxygen in the air is not enough to cause the oxidative process. Explosives get around this by containing their own oxygen in the form of oxidizing agents. For example, black powder is composed of sulfur, carbon, and potassium nitrate. Since potassium nitrate contains oxygen, it serves as the oxidizing agent.
ARSON  
When there are suspicious circumstances surrounding a fire, arson investigators are brought in to determine the source and cause of the fire. Arson is a fire purposely set, most often to look like an accident.
ARSON MOTIVES 
Why do people intentionally set fires? The reasons are many and varied, but arson invariably has a payoff. Common ones include:
FINANCIAL GAIN: Insurance fraud is at the heart of many arson cases. Perhaps quick money is needed and the insurance on the home or warehouse is greater than the property’s market value. Or a torched home might contain money or insured valuables such as jewelry or art work. A search for remnants of these items must be undertaken since they might have been removed before the fire was started. This way the perpetrator not only has the insurance money, but also the intact insured items.
COVERING ANOTHER CRIME: Arson is often used to cover another crime, such as theft. Maybe an employee has embezzled from the company and attempts to cover his crime by destroying all the financial records in a fire. Or perhaps an employee has stolen goods from a company warehouse and hopes that a fire will hide this fact. After all, if the inventory is destroyed, how can anyone determine if any stock is missing? For this reason, a fire scene is always searched for signs of breaking-and-entering and theft.
REVENGE OR TERROR: A grudge or deep-seated hatred for another might lead the arsonist to set fire to a home or business. Or an individual or a group might burn a structure in order to create fear or make a political statement.
PSYCHOPATHOLOGY: Some individuals have a pathological love for fire and start them simply because it is exciting. In these cases, the fire feeds some deep psychological need. These people often become serial arsonists.
SUICIDE AND MURDER: Fire is rarely used for suicide or murder because it is simply too painful for the former and too unpredictable for the latter. However, it is often used in an attempt to disguise or cover a murder. The killer’s hope is that the fire will make the true cause of death impossible to determine. Unfortunately for the killer, a structure fire rarely is hot enough, nor does it burn long enough to completely destroy a body. When cremated, bodies are typically exposed to temperatures in the range of 1,500°F or higher for two hours or more. This reduces the body to ashes and bone fragments. A structure fire does not often do this. In fact, even bodies that are significantly charred are often remarkably well preserved internally, allowing the ME to search for signs of trauma, poisons, and other causes of death.
ARSON INVESTIGATION 
After the firefighters have pulled people safely away from the structure, extinguished the fire, and prevented it from spreading, fire investigators then step in and attempt to determine if the fire was accident or intentional.
The investigation of a suspected arson revolves around the answer to two questions:
• Where was the fire’s point of origin?
• What was the cause of the fire? 
Point of Origin 
Locating the point of origin is the cornerstone of fire and arson investigation. Materials found in the area where the fire began help the investigator determine if the fire was accidental or intentional, and whether any igniters (the heat source that ignited the fire) or accelerants (substances that facilitate the start and spread of the fire) were used. For example, the finding of a point of origin near an overloaded wall outlet would favor an accidental fire, while finding one in a corner of a warehouse, far removed from any electrical source and near a charred gasoline can, would suggest arson. Similarly, the partially burned remains of rags, paper, or other combustible materials near the point of origin would suggest arson, as would the finding of igniter residue, such as remnants of matches or a road flare. Much to the dismay of many arsonists, these types of materials often survive even very destructive fires.
When a fire investigator approaches a charred structure, he must do so with extreme caution and only after he has received clearance from a structural engineer. If not, collapsing floors, falling beams, broken glass, sharp nails, smoldering materials, noxious gases, and asbestos (in older buildings) can pose a hazard to the investigator. However, it is imperative that the investigation and the collection of evidence begin as soon as possible after the fire has been extinguished and the structure has been deemed safe to enter. Time is the enemy because many of the volatile substances that cause or accelerate a fire rapidly dissipate.
While the structural inspection is underway, the fire investigator interviews witnesses, and from this often obtains important clues. Someone may have seen the fire in its earliest stages and this may help with locating the point of origin. The color of the flames and smoke may be helpful, since many accelerants and combustible materials produce characteristic flame and smoke colors. For example, gasoline produces a yellow flame and white smoke. Wood yields a red and yellow flame and gray or brown smoke. Rubber and some petroleum products give off red-orange flames and black smoke. The investigator can use this information to help locate the point of origin and determine if an accelerant was used.
Locating the fire’s point of origin requires an understanding of how fire moves through a structure. Fires typically spread laterally and vertically so that once the point of origin has been located, the investigator can often follow the path of the fire as it spreads through the structure. This is often possible even in heavily damaged structures. Conversely, backtracking along the fire’s route of spread may lead to the origin point. The investigator searches for a V pattern in the burned material. Since fire tends to rise and spread, it often produces a V-shaped area on a wall or other vertical surface. The point of origin is typically at the foot of the V.
It’s not always that simple, though. In significantly burned structures, the walls are often severely damaged or collapsed. But typically the greatest degree of damage is near the point of origin, so the investigator searches for that area. He also knows that it is in this area that any igniters or accelerants are most likely to be found. Unfortunately, many things obscure and confuse the issue and the investigator must consider them all.
Wind, drafts from open windows, the airflow pattern of the particular structure, stairs, elevators, and many other things can alter the way the fire spreads and where it burns the hottest. Materials used in construction and decoration, such as plastics, paints, insulating or sound-retarding materials, synthetic carpeting, and wall coverings, can create confusing “hot spots” and patterns of spread. Stored fuels and other flammable liquids interfere not only with the location of the true point of origin but may also make the search for accelerants difficult, since they themselves are accelerants. Also, the arsonist may have started multiple fires within the building or may have sloshed a path of gasoline or other accelerant throughout or around the structure. In this case the fire may have multiple points of origin. A fire with multiple points of origin is virtually always arson.
The intensity of the fire at any particular location can be estimated by assessing its effect on structural materials. Steel beams might buckle if the fire is extremely intense. Glass tends to melt around 1,500°F. Cracking and flaking of walls and floors (spalling) indicate an area of high heat. Wooden beams, floors, and walls can char, leaving an alligator-skin-like pattern. If so, the smaller “scales” tend to be near the hottest point of the fire. If the building is equipped with a system of smoke detectors, the timing with which they went off helps determine the path the fire took through the structure.
Liquid and gaseous fuels present special problems for the investigator. Liquids spread and conform to the shape of their container. If gasoline is poured on a floor, it will spread across the room, run down the stairs, and seep into the baseboards. When ignition occurs, the fire follows the liquid and spreads rapidly. Here the point of origin is widespread. Gaseous fuels, such as natural gas, diffuse in all directions until they fill a room or the entire structure. When an ignition source is added, they may explode. In this situation, finding an exact point of origin may be impossible.
Cause of the Fire 
Once the point of origin is defined, a search for potential causes follows. This requires an examination of the circumstances and factors that brought the fire and the fuel into contact in this place at this time. Particular attention is given to human factors, because if a human is involved, the fire is not natural and must be either accidental or intentional.
The next step is a thorough search of the area near the point of origin for igniters and accelerants. Potential ignition sources, such as electrical wiring, oil lamps, candles, cigarettes, fireplaces, sophisticated electrical timers, or poorly ventilated oil-soaked rags (a source for potential spontaneous combustion), are sought. An analysis of these potential ignition sources aids the fire investigator in categorizing the fire as natural, accidental, or intentional. A natural fire results from such natural occurrences as a lightning strike, while accidental sources could be frayed wiring, an overloaded circuit or extension cord, a smoldering cigarette, or a pile of oily rags. The presence of an electrical or combustible timing device of course suggests arson.
Igniting and timing devices may be simple or complex, with the most common being a match. Often the arsonist lights the fire and tosses the match aside, believing that the resulting fire will completely destroy it. However, match heads contain diatoms, single-celled organisms that are found in diatomaceous earth such as is used in match production. These tiny creatures possess silica-containing shells, which are very tough and survive fires. Interestingly, match manufacturers use different materials that contain different diatom species, which can be distinguished from one another by their shell structure. Identifying these shell remnants can indicate that a match was used and also possibly identify the brand.
Another low-tech device is a candle placed on a pile of paper. When the candle burns down, it ignites the paper and the fire takes off. A cigarette laid across an open book of matches beneath curtains is equally as simple. Or the ignition source might be a complex electrical timing device. Sometimes the igniter and an accelerant are combined, as in a Molotov cocktail. This is typically a glass container filled with a flammable liquid. A cloth “fuse” is stuffed into a hole in the jar’s lid or the bottle’s neck. Then the cloth is lit, and the device is tossed into the building. Crude, but effective. A thorough search may reveal candle residue, a cigarette butt, the remains of the electrical device, or the neck of the bottle with cloth remnants inside.
Accelerants 
An accelerant is any substance that promotes or accelerates the intensity and the progress of the fire. Arsonists almost always use accelerants. Simply dropping a match onto a pile of paper or tossing a cigarette on a sofa is too unpredictable. The arsonist wants to be sure that the fire will take hold and burn.
Accelerants may be solids, liquids, or gases. Solid accelerants include paper, black powder, and kindling wood. Liquids include gasoline, kerosene, alcohols, and paint thinners. Typical gaseous accelerants are natural gas and propane.
Liquid accelerants, particularly gasoline and kerosene, are by far the most commonly used fire accelerators. Even if the structure is severely damaged, traces of these accelerants remain. They soak into carpets and brickwork, seep into baseboards and crevices, and settle into areas beneath the fire. Remnants survive most fires, and investigators make a diligent search for them in any suspicious fire. Since obtaining samples from where accelerants were likely used gives him the best chance of finding and identifying them, the investigator uses several techniques to narrow his search.
Accelerants intensify fire, so the easiest first step is to look for the visible signs that indicate the fire burned faster and hotter than would be expected in a given area. These signs include:
ALLIGATORING: The surface of wood exposed to a severe heat is covered with rolling blisters that resemble alligator scales.
CRAZING: Intense fires crack glass in an irregular pattern.
SPALLING: Chipped, flaked, and discolored bricks or concrete indicate an intense fire.
CHAR DEPTH: A normal fire burns wood to a depth of approximately one inch for each forty-five minutes. A deeper, faster burn indicates a hotter fire.
The arson investigator might employ specially trained dogs that sniff out traces of accelerants, or perhaps a detector such as a vapor trace analyzer (VTA). This “artificial nose”—actually a specialized gas chromatograph—is extremely sensitive and tests for flammable hydrocarbon residues in the air around sites of accelerant residue. The VTA has a nozzle, a heating element, and a temperature gauge. A sample of the air and any accelerant vapors it might contain is drawn in through the nozzle and passed over a heating element. If the sample burns, it raises the temperature within the device, causing a needle in the temperature gauge to rise. A bump in the temperature is presumptive evidence that a flammable residue is present. Further samples are taken and returned to the lab for more thorough analysis.
Once accelerant-rich areas are located, samples for testing are obtained. The sooner this is done the better since most accelerants are volatile petroleum-based hydrocarbons, such as gasoline and kerosene, and their vapors will dissipate with time. To prevent loss of this crucial evidence, any materials gathered must be placed in nonporous, sealed containers. Sealed cans, such as clean paint cans, and glass jars are best. Plastic bags are not advisable, since the plastic can react with the hydrocarbons and the volatile gases might escape through the damaged material.
If possible, the examiner not only takes sections of the charred carpet but also samples of the same carpet from any unburned areas. This gives him an uncontaminated substrate against which to compare the suspect sample. This is important since many carpets, linoleum flooring, and tile adhesives contain volatile hydrocarbons, which can test positive for accelerant residues. A comparison of the burned and unburned segments can separate a foreign hydrocarbon from those naturally occurring in the burned material.
All the materials—charred wood, pieces of carpet, furniture remnants, even empty bottles that are suspected of having held a flammable liquid—are collected and taken to the crime lab. The first step in the analysis is to extract any accelerant chemicals from the debris. The most common methods used for this are:
STEAM DISTILLATION: The charred material is heated and the steam is collected and condensed. The resulting liquid contains any volatile hydrocarbons.
SOLVENT EXTRACTION: The sample is placed in a container with a solvent such as chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, methylene chloride, or carbon disulfide. Hydrocarbons will be leeched from the material as they dissolve in the solvent and are then separated and analyzed.
HEADSPACE VAPOR EXTRACTION: The material is placed in a closed container. The natural volatility of the hydrocarbons creates a vapor-rich gas above the material in the container’s “headspace.” Heating the sample slightly accelerates this process. The vapor is then removed from the container with a syringe and tested.
VAPOR CONCENTRATION: The sample is heated in a closed container, which also contains charcoal. Volatile hydrocarbons leave the sample and absorb into the charcoal. The charcoal is then removed and the hydrocarbons are extracted by using a solvent.
Once any volatile hydrocarbons have been extracted, they are analyzed to determine their nature and type. By far, the most useful tool for this procedure is the gas chromatograph (GC) (see the appendix). Since gasoline, kerosene, and other commonly used petroleum-based accelerants are actually mixtures of various hydrocarbons, the GC device separates them into their components. These are then compared to known standards and the identity of the substance is revealed.
Usually GC is all that is needed for identification, but if further delineation of the sample is necessary, the GC may be combined with mass spectroscopy (GC/MS) or with infrared spectroscopy (GC/IR). Either of these give a molecular “fingerprint” of the substance.
Each batch of gasoline produced varies slightly in its chemical makeup and additive content. Though it is not possible to determine the exact manufacturer of a given sample, a comparative analysis between the unknown sample and those taken from nearby or suspect service stations may trace it to a particular station. Though this is not completely reliable, the examiner might be able to say that it is at least possible that the sample came from a particular source. An investigation into who purchased gasoline at that location during a particular time period might lead investigators to a suspect.
HOMICIDAL FIRES 
Sometimes a body turns up among the fire debris and the coroner and homicide investigators are called in. The purpose of their investigations is to identify the corpse and to determine the cause of death and whether the manner was accidental or homicidal.
The coroner uses whatever is available to identify the victim (see Chapter Four: Identifying the Body). Depending on the condition of the body, physical characteristics such as stature, age, sex, tattoos, birthmarks, and surgical scars and appliances can help. Surgical appliances are man-made devices placed inside the body and range from artificial hips to pacemakers to metal rods inside bones.
Fingerprints, dental matching, and DNA might also be useful. However, fingerprints might not be obtainable and the corpse could be so severely damaged that no usable DNA survived the fire. But even in severely burned bodies, many of the internal organs do survive, and DNA can often be obtained from these organs or from the bone marrow or dental pulp. This is particularly true for the hardier mitochondrial DNA (see Chapter Ten: DNA, “Mitochondrial DNA”).
One question the ME must answer is whether the victim was alive at the time the fire started. If so, an accident is possible. If not, homicide becomes a more likely manner of death, since dead folks don’t usually start fires. Determining the cause and manner of death depends on careful evaluation of the fire scene and the autopsy. The ME looks at things such as the position of the body, the carbon monoxide level of the blood and tissue, the presence or absence of soot in the lungs and airways, and the nature of the burns.
BODY POSITION: The position of the body can be telling. For example, if the corpse is found on a bed, the cause of death is smoke inhalation, and the fire’s origin is found to be a cigarette in contact with bedding, the death would likely be accidental. But what if the victim is a nonsmoker? Why would he be smoking (unless he was a clandestine smoker)? Or could the cigarette be the arsonist’s chosen igniter, thus making the death homicidal? Interestingly, the ME can often measure the nicotine level in the victim’s urine, where a high level would indicate that he was indeed a smoker.
On the other hand, what if the victim’s burned corpse is found bound and gagged in the basement with a gunshot wound to the head? Here, the manner of death is clearly homicide. Homicide would also be likely if stab wounds, strangulation marks, or significant trauma, such as bone fractures, were present.
A common misconception is that if a body is found curled into a fetal position it means the victim was alive at the time the fire started and suffered great pain before death. This is simply untrue. A burning corpse will often assume a “pugilistic position” or a boxer’s posture. The legs and arms are flexed and the fists are tucked beneath the chin. This posture is due to contraction of the body’s muscles as the fire “cooks” and dehydrates them.
CO LEVEL: Most deaths in fires are due to asphyxia from smoke and carbon monoxide (CO) inhalation (see Chapter Eight: Asphyxia, “Toxic Gases”). CO is a byproduct of the combustion of organic materials such as wood. The ME tests the victim’s blood and tissues for its level. A normal level is less than 10 percent, though in smokers, it may be slightly higher. In victims of CO asphyxiation, the level ranges from 45 to 90 percent. The finding of a high level suggests that the victim died from smoke and CO inhalation, while a low level favors the victim being dead at the time the fire started.
CO poisoning not only causes death directly, but can also prevent the victim from escaping the fire. As the blood CO level rises, the person’s ability to think and move appropriately declines. At a CO level of 30 percent, dizziness and confusion appears; at 50 percent weakness, loss of coordination, and disorientation occur; and at higher levels loss of consciousness and death follow. This means that the victim might have been alive and had time to escape, but the toxicity of the CO prevented him from doing so.
Another autopsy finding in victims of CO poisoning is a high level of carboxyhemoglobin, which occurs as CO combines with the blood’s hemoglobin. Carboxyhemoglobin imparts a bright, cherry-red color to the blood, muscles, and organs of the victim. When the ME sees this, he will suspect that CO inhalation played a role in the death and will then proceed to prove this by assessing the CO level in the blood and tissues.
AIRWAY SOOT: In addition to a high blood CO level, the finding of soot in the mouth, throat, lungs, and airways would suggest that the victim was alive and breathing as the fire burned. Conversely, if the CO level is low and no soot is present in the airways, another cause of death must be considered.
NATURE OF THE BURNS: When a living person suffers a burn, the body immediately begins the repair process by diverting extra blood flow to the area, causing the surrounding tissues to become hyperemic. This is a big word meaning that the tissues are filled with blood, which also brings in many white blood cells (WBCs) to begin the repair process. If the ME performs microscopic examinations of the burned tissues and sees increased blood and WBCs in the surrounding areas, the victim was alive at the time the tissues burned. If the victim was already dead, no reaction could occur since the heart was not beating and no blood could flow into the area.
Also, an examination of any blisters on the skin might help. The fluid that collects inside blisters that occur during life tend to be rich in protein, while those that occur after death are not. The ME can often test the protein level and determine if the blistering occurred pre- or post-mortem.
So, burns with surrounding hyperemia and many WBCs and blisters filled with protein-rich fluids indicate that the victim was alive at the time of the fire. If the opposite is the case, then the victim was likely dead, due to homicide or smoke inhalation or some other cause, before the fire reached him.
Let’s look more closely at the situation of the burned body that is found bound, gagged, and shot. The ME performs an autopsy and blood CO levels to determine the cause of death. The question is: What killed the victim? The gunshot or the fire? The finding of high blood CO levels and soot within the lungs and bronchial tubes would lead the ME to conclude that the victim lived through the gunshot and died as a result of CO inhalation. Or, if a low blood CO level is found, the gunshot is the likely cause of death. This may be critical to prosecutors if there were two perpetrators in the crime. One pulled the trigger and the other started the fire; one is the murderer and the other an accomplice. The charges filed against each depends on the ME’s findings.
EXPLOSIONS  
An explosion is an extremely rapid oxidative reaction. The key to any explosive device is confining the explosive material. If ignited in an unconfined space, the material simply burns, while if tightly packed into a container, ignition results in an explosive reaction.
Detonation releases a large amount of expanding gas, which compresses the surrounding air in a concussive wave. This wave travels at high speed and does severe and sudden damage to anything in its path. This creates numerous problems for the investigator, since the explosive device and any surrounding structures are heavily damaged, if not completely destroyed. Unless a secondary fire occurs, determining the point of origin is usually easy, but finding fragments of the device or any igniters or timers may be more difficult.
Explosives are deemed high or low by the speed of the pressure wave they produce. Low explosives typically move at rates of 1,000 meters per second or less, while high explosives may reach up to 8,500 meters per second.
The most commonly used low explosives are black powder and smokeless gunpowder. Gunpowder, which consists of nitrocellulose (nitrated cotton— cotton treated with nitric acid) with or without nitroglycerine, may be purchased, while black powder can be easily made with charcoal, sulfur, and potassium nitrate. Another easily made explosive is a combination of sugar and potassium chlorate. Bombers don’t need to be chemists, and unfortunately a great deal of bomb-making information is easily available on the Internet.
High explosives are further subdivided into initiating or noninitiating, depending upon their sensitivity to heat, friction, or mechanical shock.
INITIATING EXPLOSIVES: These are very sensitive to heat, friction, and shock, which means that they have a great potential for unexpected detonation. For this reason, they are rarely used in home-manufactured bombs. More often, they are found in primers and blasting caps, where they are used to initiate other less sensitive noninitiating explosive materials. Mercury fulminate and lead azide are commonly used in this fashion.
NONINITIATING EXPLOSIVES: These are more stable and less likely to be accidentally detonated. They require a fuse or some type of initiating device to set them off. They are the most commonly used materials in commercial and military applications. Examples are dynamite, trinitrotoluene (TNT), pentaerythritrol tetranitrate (PETN), and cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine (RDX). Though dynamite is still available, it and other nitroglycerine-based explosives have largely been replaced by ammonium nitrate-based explosives.
Ammonium nitrate-fuel oil (ANFO) is an easily made explosive material. Ammonium nitrate, found in fertilizers, is an oxygen-rich oxidant. Bombs produced from this substance were involved in the Oklahoma City and 1993 World Trade Center bombings.
Searching the scene of a bombing requires the same attention to detail as with an arson scene. The finding of fragments from the explosive device, the igniter, and any timer may be crucial to determining the type of explosive used, and ultimately the person responsible. Besides locating these fragments, the search is directed toward the collection of debris to test for unexploded residue, which is almost always present.
Microscopic examination of the debris may reveal black powder and gunpowder, which are easily recognizable by the color and shape of their particles. After this inspection, the debris is rinsed with a solvent such as acetone, in which most explosives are soluble. The resulting solution is then analyzed, using thin layer or gas chromatography as well as mass spectroscopy and infrared spectroscopy (see the appendix), and the particular explosive used is identified. Once this is known, investigators can focus their efforts on the sellers and buyers of this particular product. This information can also serve to link two or more separate bombings.
Serial bombers are similar to serial arsonists in that they typically have deep-seated anger toward someone or an institution such as a company or the government. At times, the bombings are meant to deliver a political message or cause terror. But, as with most serial offenders, serial bombers develop habits. They repeatedly use materials and set up situations where they feel comfortable. This means that they tend to use the same types of explosives and timing or triggering devices over and over. An analysis of the explosive material and of any devices associated with the bomb can often link several bombings and ultimately lead to the perpetrator. 
