---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_014.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["bone", "may", "corpse", "body", "age", "time", "forensic", "death", "person", "year", "victim", "might", "one", "individual", "teeth", "often", "many", "area", "remains", "identification", "also", "skull", "skeleton", "found", "dna"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit014html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 4 
IDENTIFYING THE BODY: 
WHO IS THE VICTIM? 
All too often the police and the medical examiner are confronted with identifying an unknown corpse. In movies this process usually takes only a few minutes of screen time, but in the real world it may take weeks, months, or years. Not infrequently, the body is never identified.
The corpse in question may have been dead for hours, days, months, or many years. Depending upon the time since death, the identification may be as easy as on television or it may be very complex and involve many different forensic disciplines and techniques.
If the body is more or less intact, size, sex, race, scars and tattoos, facial photographs, fingerprints, and DNA examination as well as the victim’s clothing might help with identification. But, if the body is significantly decayed, much of this identifying information may not be available.
If the body is skeletal, the problem of identification is further magnified. The help of a forensic anthropologist, a forensic odontologist (dentist), and a forensic artist may be needed. They will work together to establish the person’s identity, estimate the time since death, and, it is hoped, determine the cause and manner of death.
Whether the investigation centers on a single murder victim or found body, victims of a mass disaster such as a plane crash or hurricane, or a collection of corpses found in a mass grave, the skills of these experts are crucial. These same professionals might also be asked to reconstruct the face of the victim from the facial bones.
THE IMPORTANCE OF IDENTIFICATION  
Besides the desire to reunite the deceased with his family and to allow a proper burial, there are many police and forensic issues that make corpse identification critical. In the case of a homicide victim, his identity will be the single most important factor in solving the crime. Ninety percent of the time, people are killed by people they know—a family member, lover, friend, business associate, or by some other person they have a relationship with. One factor that makes serial killers so difficult to track is that these are usually stranger killings, that is, the killer and the victim had no long-term relationship. But most killers and victims do, so identification of the corpse will allow investigators to dig into the relationships the victim had.
BASIC CONSIDERATIONS 
Mother Nature and time are not kind to the dead. From the moment of death, extreme weather, bacteria, insects, and predators work to destroy the body. The condition of the body when it is found depends upon how long ago the death occurred and whether it is left exposed to the elements or buried.
If exposed to the elements, the damage to the corpse is more rapid and more severe. Not only is an unburied corpse affected directly by water and extremes of temperature, it is also a target for predatory animals and insects. In warm, moist climates bacteria and insects can reduce a corpse to bones in short order, while in colder, drier areas, this may take many months, even years (see Chapter Five: Time of Death). And when animal predators enter the picture, as is often the case with exposed corpses, the body can be literally eaten and the bones scattered far and wide. Sometimes only a bone or two, or perhaps a skull, is found and the remainder of the corpse is never located. As we will see later in this chapter, this presents a difficult problem to the forensic anthropologist.
Though burial provides some protection, this protection is incomplete. The most important factors in the destruction of a buried body are the time since burial, the burial container, and the depth of the grave. Other than time, which is an uncontrollable factor, the container is of paramount importance. A body simply buried with no coffin will deteriorate much faster than one in a metal coffin. Obviously, a cardboard box or plastic bag provides little protection. A shallow grave will attract more insects and predators than will one that is “six feet deep.”
A body tossed into water presents similar problems. Whether weighted down or not, a corpse almost always sinks initially. It will remain submerged until enough decomposition gas collects within the tissues and body cavities to make it buoyant, at which time it will rise to the surface and become a “floater.” The time required for this depends mostly on the water temperature. We will look at this process more closely in Chapter Five.
WAs you can see, what happens to a corpse and the time it takes for a corpse to decay completely varies with its location. The general rule is that one week in the open equals two weeks in water equals eight weeks in the ground.
PRESERVED CORPSES 
Not all bodies decay and become skeletal. Sometimes conditions within the environment will lead to incredible degrees of preservation, even after many years. Soils high in acid or alkali content may delay or prevent bacterial growth, and thus putrefaction (decay). This is the situation with bodies found in boggy areas. These “bog people” may remain in remarkably good condition for decades. Frozen bodies are often very well preserved, as are those that undergo mummification. Mummification occurs when a body is exposed to hot and dry conditions that desiccate (dry out) the body, removing the water that bacteria need to grow and putrefy the corpse. What remains is a dark-colored corpse that looks as though leathery skin has been shrunk over a skeleton. These processes will be dealt with in Chapter Five.
In addition, conditions within the body may delay putrefaction and promote preservation. The presence of high levels of poisons such as arsenic may kill off the bacteria and delay putrefaction so that even bodies that have been dead for many years appear as if they have been dead only weeks.
GETTING RID OF THE BODY 
Some criminals attempt to destroy corpses, the primary pieces of evidence in homicides. They think that if the police never find the body, they can’t be convicted. This isn’t true, since convictions have in many cases been obtained when no body is found. And destroying a body is no easy task.
Fire seems to be the favorite tool for this effort. Fortunately, this is essentially never successful. Short of a crematorium, it is nearly impossible to create a fire that burns hot enough or long enough to destroy a human corpse. Cremation uses temperatures of around 1,500ºF for two hours or more and still bone fragments and teeth survive. A torched building would rarely reach these temperatures and would not burn for this long. The body inside may be severely charred on the surface, but the inner tissues and internal organs are often very well preserved.
Another favorite is quicklime. Murderers use this because they have seen it in the movies and because they don’t typically have degrees in chemistry. If they did, they might think twice about this one. Not that quicklime won’t destroy a corpse; it just takes a long time and a lot of the chemical. Most killers who use this method simply dump some on the corpse and bury it, thinking the lime will do its work and nothing will remain. Quicklime is calcium oxide. When it contacts water, as it often does in burial sites, it reacts with the water to make calcium hydroxide, also known as slaked lime. This corrosive material may damage the corpse, but the heat produced from this activity will kill many of the putrefying bacteria and dehydrate the body. This conspires to prevent decay and promote mummification. Thus, the use of quicklime may actually help preserve the body.
Acids are also used in this regard, and once again the criminal hopes the acid will completely dissolve the body. Serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer tried this with little success. Indeed, powerful acids such as hydrochloric acid (HCl), sulfuric acid (H2SO4), and chlorosulfuric acid (HClSO3) can destroy a corpse, bones and all. If enough acid is used over a sufficient period of time, that is. But this is not only difficult but also extremely hazardous. The acids will indeed destroy the corpse, but they will also “eat” the tub the body is in and chew up the plumbing. Acid fumes will peel the wallpaper and burn the perpetrator’s skin, eyes, and lungs.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: THE ACID BATH MURDERER 
John George Haigh came to the English public’s attention in the 1940s when he confessed to not only multiple murders, but also to drinking his victims’ blood and destroying their corpses with acid. He seemed to favor sulfuric acid, which he kept in a vat in his workshop. He took the victims’ money and, through forgery, their property and businesses, and then basically laughed at the police as he admitted to the killings, believing they could not prosecute him without a corpse. He was wrong. He was convicted through forensic evidence and was hanged at Wandsworth Prison on August 10, 1949.
So, whether it’s Mother Nature or the work of the perpetrator, something almost always remains for the ME and the other forensic scientist to work with. It may be an intact body, a partially destroyed corpse, or a single bone, but it will give them something to use in identification. Let’s take a look at how they do this—first with a body and then with only skeletal remains.
CORPSE IDENTIFICATION 
An intact or only partially decayed body gives the coroner a great deal to work with—in this case, the age, race, sex, and stature of the person are usually obvious. Also, a facial photograph of the corpse can be compared with photos or descriptions of any reported missing persons. Once a presumptive match has been made, family or friends may be able to make the final identification. If no missing person matches the general characteristics of the corpse, descriptions and photos can be circulated to law enforcement and the media.
If it were always that easy, the identification of a corpse would be a simple task. But all too often this is not the case, and the ME and his staff must resort to other means.
BURIAL ARTIFACTS 
Corpses are often buried along with their clothing, jewelry, and other items. Needless to say, a wallet, ID card, or military dog tags would be helpful. Medic Alert medallions or bracelets can usually be traced to the owner. Not always, though, since some are inscribed only with the needed medical information, while others bear the person’s name or an ID number. A locket might contain a picture of a loved one, and rings and bracelets are often inscribed with names, initials, or dates.
Clothing may be distinctive in either style or manufacturer. For example, designer clothes and shoes may lead the police into one area of search while the ragged clothes of a homeless individual may lead in another. Laundry marks can often be traced to a particular cleaner, and then to the owner of the item.
The person may have been buried in a coffin or in a blanket or some other material. An expensive metal coffin would bear the manufacturer’s name and maybe a serial number, but rarely are unidentified victims of accidents and murders placed in such coffins. A makeshift, wooden coffin might provide information from its construction materials and methods, or from any distinctive markings it might bear. The same is true for blankets or sheets, which often have manufacturer or seller tags. A plastic bag might offer up the prints of the perpetrator, which could then lead to the identity of the corpse.
BODY MARKS, DISEASES, AND SCARS 
Body marks, such as birthmarks and tattoos, are often so distinctive that they supply strong identifying evidence.
Birthmarks come in many varieties. One distinctive type is called a port-wine stain (naevus flammeus), a reddish or purplish discoloration that may be small or cover a large area such as an entire shoulder or half of someone’s face. Former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev has such a mark on his forehead. Port wine stains are typically very irregular, like an amoeba, and thus have a pattern that is distinctive, no two being exactly alike. If the unknown corpse has such a mark, an old photo revealing the mark could be used to make a positive identification.
Tattoos may be just as distinctive, and at times, a family member or friend will recognize the design. Some tattoos can be traced to the artist, particularly today since tattoos are considered body art and some tattoo artists have very individual styles. Followers of such art can often identify a particular artist’s work.
Though far from a universal practice, the tattoos and other body marks seen on those who have been arrested are often sketched or photographed as part of the booking process. If such sketches or photos exist from a previous arrest, they can be compared to those on the corpse.
Gang tattoos, which identify a person as a member of a particular gang, may narrow the search. If the deceased has had a previous brush with the law, a former cellmate, corrections officer, or arresting officer might recognize the tattoo and be able to supply at least a presumptive identification. In addition, many police jurisdictions maintain files of the tattoos associated with the gangs that operate in the area. For example, California’s CAL/GANG, established in 1987, is a database of information on known gang members throughout the state, including descriptions and photos of members’ tattoos. Outside California, many states use the similar GangNet. A search of these databases may yield a hit and supply the needed identification.
A forensic chemist can also help. Many tattooists use black pigments that contain carbon, reds that contain mercuric chloride, and greens with potassium dichromate. Others use aniline-based dyes. It is possible to extract and analyze some of the pigment from the corpse’s skin and help confirm that a particular artist did the work.
The usefulness of tattoos is underlined in a famous Australian case that became known as the Shark Arm Case.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: JAMES SMITH—THE SHARK ARM CASE 
In April 1935, two fishermen caught a large tiger shark off the coast of Sydney, Australia, and donated the creature to a local aquarium. A few days later the shark regurgitated a well-preserved, muscular, Caucasian human arm. The shark was sacrificed and an autopsy was performed, but no more human remains were found.
The arm appeared to have been removed by a knife rather than by the shark’s teeth. Further, the knife wounds appeared to have occurred postmortem. The arm bore a tattoo of two boxers squaring off. Through meticulous work, fingerprints were obtained, and they indicated that the victim was James Smith, an ex-boxer with a criminal past. His wife identified the tattoo.
Further investigation led the police to Patrick Brady, a known forger and drug-trafficker, who had gone on a fishing trip with the victim just before his disappearance. Police theorized that Brady killed Smith, hacked him to pieces, and stuffed his remains into a trunk that was missing from the fishing shack the two men had shared. Smith’s arm must have slipped free in the water and been swallowed by the shark. Under questioning, Brady implicated another man named Reginald Holmes, who was himself shot to death the day before the inquest into Smith’s death was to begin. Brady’s attorneys obtained an injunction from the court, halting the inquest on the grounds that an arm was not sufficient evidence to bring murder charges. The police charged Brady with murder anyway, but a jury, likely influenced by the court ruling, acquitted him.
Occasionally, broadcasting the description of the victim and his clothing, jewelry, and tattoos or birthmarks over the media is all that is needed to identify the unknown corpse. You’ve seen TV reports in which the police request help Occasionally, broadcasting the description of the victim and his clothing, jewelry, and tattoos or birthmarks over the media is all that is needed to identify the unknown corpse. A reporter may give a description such as a 6-foot-2, 180-pound, white male, thirty to forty years of age, with brown hair, brown eyes, and a tattoo that says “Martha” on his upper arm. He may add that the victim was wearing blue jeans and a red plaid shirt and that he was wrapped in a blue wool blanket. A photo of the corpse may be shown. The hope is that someone will recognize the photo, the tattoo, the clothing, or the blanket and come forward to identify the corpse.
If all this fails, at autopsy, the ME might discover that the victim had some disease or previous surgical procedure that may narrow the search. Medical conditions such as acromegaly, neurofibromatosis, scleroderma, and others are uncommon yet easily identifiable. A search of missing persons with these unusual conditions may lead to a quick identification. Some diseases have national registries and support groups, and the deceased could have a membership. Checking with these organizations could prove helpful.
If the victim has had an appendectomy or a gallbladder removal, a search of missing persons’ reports of the same age and sex who also had these procedures might help. This is particularly true if the surgery was fairly recent, since the ME can often determine the age of surgical wounds.
Any repaired wound, whether surgical or from a knife fight, will follow the same healing pattern. During the first week, the wound has sutures (stitches) in place. And for several months after suture removal, the telltale pattern of the suturing can be seen.
For several weeks, any scar will be slightly pink to brownish red due to the microscopic blood vessels that invade the area to aid with the healing process. Over the next few months, as the body repairs the damage by laying down collagen (thick strands of connective tissue), the color gradually fades and the scar shrinks considerably. As the scar matures, it finally becomes a faint white line by four to six months. The collagen continues to shrink for about one year. Thereafter, the scar remains unchanged for life. This means that the age of a scar can be approximated in the first four to six months or so.
A surgical appliance is any artificial, manufactured device used in surgical treatment. They typically bear unique markings. For example, if the corpse in question has had a hip replacement, the ME can remove the artificial hip at autopsy and examine it. Such prosthetic joints possess engraved serial numbers, which can be traced to the manufacturer, the hospital where the replacement was done, and to the person who received it. Pacemakers, implantable defibrillators, heart valves, and other cardiac devices also have traceable serial numbers.
FINGERPRINTS OF THE DEAD 
Unless the corpse is severely deteriorated, fingerprints can usually be obtained and matched against known missing persons and national fingerprint databases; this would lead to a quick and absolute identity (see Chapter Twelve: Fingerprints). Fingerprints can even be obtained from mummified bodies in some circumstances. The finger pads of such corpses are shriveled and have the texture of old leather, but soaking them in water or glycerin may swell them enough for fingerprints to be obtained. Or saline can be injected into the tips of the fingers, which swells the pads and reveals the friction ridges. Alternatively, the skin over the pads of the fingers can be carefully sliced away and placed between two microscopic slides for viewing and photographing.
DENTAL COMPARISONS 
Forensic odontologists are frequently involved in the identification of corpses. The value of dental comparisons lies in their being almost as individual as fingerprints. Everyone’s teeth are different. You and I may have the same number and types of teeth, but the length, width, and shape of each shows great variability. Missing, misaligned, and reconstructed teeth (fillings, crowns, and bridges) as well as chips, furrows, and wear patterns, add even more individuality.
When faced with an unidentified corpse, the ME often makes a set of dental X-rays, which can then be compared with the most recent dental X-rays of a missing person who fits the corpse’s general description as to age, sex, and size. With a match, the identity of the corpse is confirmed.
This points out the main problem with dental comparisons: having something to compare the corpse’s dental pattern against. If the police have no clues as to who the person might be, such as a missing person’s report of someone who fits the general description of the unknown corpse, they can’t obtain that person’s dental records for comparison.
Newer techniques allow for the chemical analysis of filling materials, which could lead investigators to the manufacturer of the material or the dentist who uses it. This might be an important step in ultimately identifying the corpse. Let’s say only one local dentist used the type of filling material found in a corpse and he had only used it on two dozen patients. A comparison of those patients’ dental records with the dental pattern of the corpse might lead to a positive identification.
The dentist might see changes that relate to the person’s occupation. This information can help narrow the list of possibilities or move the investigation down a new path. The mouthpiece of certain wind instruments can alter the teeth of those who frequently play them. Nails can chip the teeth of the carpenter who holds them in his mouth as he works.
Using teeth as a method of identity is not a modern endeavor. In the first century A.D., the Roman Emperor Claudius demanded to see the teeth of his beheaded mistress to assure her identity. She apparently had a distinctively discolored front tooth. William the Conqueror used his crooked teeth to bite, and thus identify, the wax seal on his letters. In 1776, Paul Revere identified the body of a friend after the Battle of Bunker Hill. It seems that Revere had made a pair of dentures for the man and recognized his own handiwork.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: DR. JOSEPH WARREN’S TEETH 
Paul Revere was a gifted metal smith and engraver and had been schooled in the art of dentistry. In 1775, he made a set of dentures for his friend Dr. Joseph Warren.
Dr. Warren fell in the Battle of Bunker Hill in June of that year and was buried in a mass grave for those killed in action. Warren’s family wanted his body disinterred for a private burial. To do this, Dr. Warren’s corpse had to be distinguished from all the others. A positive identification came when Revere recognized the dentures he had made for his friend.
Today, in the case of mass disasters or where mass graves are uncovered, X-rays taken from each of the corpses are matched with X-rays from suspected victims, if these X-rays are available. This greatly speeds up the identifying process. Though dental records are still used in such situations, DNA is replacing this technique in many areas.
BLOOD TYPE AND THE CORPSE 
The forensic use of blood typing is dealt with in Chapter Nine, but blood type can also help with identifying a corpse. At least it can exclude certain possible identities. This is based on the fact that a person’s blood type is determined by the blood type of his parents and certain pairings cannot produce children of certain types. For example, if a corpse that is thought to be John Smith is found to have type B blood and John’s parents are type O and type A, the corpse is not John. The two parents could not bear a type B child. So, blood typing excludes John. But if the corpse had type A or type O blood, John remains a possibility. This does not confirm that the corpse is John, but it doesn’t exclude that possibility either. This will become clearer after you read Chapter Nine.
DNA AND THE CORPSE 
DNA will be discussed in detail in Chapter Ten. Its usefulness in identifying an unknown corpse is limited but, when possible, it can make an absolute identification. Why is it limited? The simple reason is that, like fingerprints and dental comparisons, DNA from the corpse must be compared against the DNA of the person suspected of being the corpse. But, as with fingerprints, there is a national databank that might help in some circumstances. The DNA databank known as the Combined DNA Index System (CODIS), though still woefully inadequate, is growing, and if the victim’s DNA profile is in CODIS, a match can be made. If not, DNA from a corpse may still be useful to the ME.
Let’s say the ME suspects that the corpse on his table is John Smith, who has been missing for a few months. The corpse is severely decayed, so visual identification is impossible and fingerprints cannot be obtained. Further, John has no dental records. John’s family may bring in his hairbrush or toothbrush or 
FORENSIC CASE FILE: XIANA FAIRCHILD’S DNA 
On December 19, 1999, Antoinette Robinson reported that her seven-year-old daughter, Xiana Fairchild, was missing. After an extensive search of the area, neither the girl nor her body could be found, so the police had little to go on. Then in January 2001, a construction worker found a partial skull and jawbone near a mountainous road some sixty miles south of Xiana’s Vallejo, California, home. The bones were recognized as being from a child around Xiana’s age. DNA from one of the molars in the jawbone was compared with DNA obtained from Xiana’s toothbrush, and the skull and jaw fragments were identified as those of Xiana. It was also determined that even though she had been abducted in December 1999, her murder did not take place until around August 2000. perhaps envelopes or stamps he had licked, and the ME might be able to extract DNA from these to compare with that taken from the corpse. With the newer DNA techniques of PCR and STR (see Chapter 10: DNA, “The DNA Fingerprinting Process”), this type of identification is becoming increasingly common.
Ultimately, Curtis Dean Anderson, a cabdriver who had been fired a few days before Xiana’s abduction, was charged with the crime. When charged, he was already in prison serving a 251-year sentence for the abduction and molestation of an eight-year-old girl who escaped from him just days before Xiana’s disappearance. Ominously, Anderson had been to Xiana’s house a few weeks before her disappearance, visiting Robert Turnbough, a fellow cabdriver and boyfriend of Xiana’s mother.
If none of the above information leads to identification of the corpse, the coroner must resort to other, more creative, methods. The case of Abraham Becker and Reuben Norkin illustrates just how clever an astute ME can be.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: ABRAHAM BECKER, REUBEN NORKIN, AND THE CANAPÉS 
Abraham Becker and his wife, Jennie, had a rocky marriage at best. On April 6, 1922, in New York City, they attended a party at a friend’s home. Jennie ate canapés, almonds, grapes, and figs. After they left the party, Jennie was never seen alive again. Becker said that she had run off with another man. The police investigation led to Reuben Norkin, a business associate of Becker’s. Under pressure, Norkin admitted that he had helped Becker bury the missing woman’s body. He said that Becker had killed her with a wrench and buried her body in a shallow grave, sprinkling it with lime in the hopes of hastening its destruction. He led police to the shallow grave.
When confronted, Becker said that the corpse was not that of his wife. He said that his wife was larger than the corpse and that the clothes were not the ones she had been wearing when she was last seen. Medical examiner Dr. Karl Kennard performed an autopsy and found that the victim’s stomach was very well preserved. Within it he found almonds, grapes, figs, and meat-spread canapés. Becker countered that any woman could have eaten these foods, but when the meat-spread was tested its ingredients were identical to the spread served at the party. It was an old family recipe. Both men were convicted of first-degree murder.
CAUSE OF DEATH 
After examining the body, the ME might be able to determine the cause, which might help identify the victim. A drug overdose would lead to a canvassing of local dealers and users. A distinctive knife wound might instigate a search into where such a weapon could be purchased and ultimately to who bought it. The victim of a gunshot wound would be x-rayed in an attempt to locate the bullet, which could then be removed and examined by ballistics experts. This could lead to the murder weapon and the shooter.
The point of these investigations is that identifying the perpetrator may allow identification of the victim since most murders occur between people who know each other. Even if the perpetrator refuses to talk, an investigation into his background, acquaintances, and business dealings may help identify the victim.
SKELETAL REMAINS  
Sometimes the forensic team doesn’t have a body to work with, only a skeleton. In this situation, the expertise of a forensic anthropologist and a forensic odontologist are usually brought into play. As with a corpse, the investigators follow a logical sequence in attempting to identify the remains. They are asked to answer several questions:
• Are the bones human?
• What are the victim’s biological characteristics (size, age, sex, and race)?
• How long has the person been dead?
• What is the cause and manner of death? 
Though the science of anthropology has been around for a long time, the field of forensic anthropology can be dated to 1939 and the publication of Dr. W.M. Krogman’s classic article on the examination of human skeletal remains in the FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin. In 1972, the American Academy of Forensic Sciences established the Physical Anthropology Section, and in 1977, the American Board of Forensic Anthropology (ABFA) began to professionally certify workers in this field. The field has expanded rapidly since then.
The skeletal remains the forensic anthropologist deals with might be in the form of an intact skeleton, a partial skeleton, a handful of bones, or just a single bone. They may be scattered on the ground, buried, or found within a structure.
HUMAN VS. ANIMAL 
The first question that must be answered is whether the bones are human. Sounds easy, and most of the time it is—if a complete adult skeleton is present. But with time and the effects of nature and various animal predators, which can scatter and destroy portions of the skeleton, a complete set of bones is not always available. This can lead to great difficulties for the examiner. For example, the front paw bones of a bear are similar to those of a human hand, shell fragments from some turtles often resemble skull fragments, and the ribs of sheep and deer appear similar to human ribs.
If the victim is an infant or young child, determining that the bones are human may be even more difficult. Infant bones and teeth are much smaller and are easier to confuse with small animal bones and teeth. An infant’s skull is not completely fused (joined together into a single structure) so that an intact skull will not be found.
Yet, with careful examination, a skilled forensic anthropologist can usually distinguish human bones from those of other animals. This is a highly technical endeavor that requires great experience, so it is beyond the scope of this text.
BIOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
Once it has been established that the bones are of human origin, the anthropologist turns his attention to identifying the person by first looking into the corpse’s biological characteristics before moving on to assessing the time, cause, and manner of death.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
Any hope of identifying an unknown corpse rests with determining the deceased individual’s biological characteristics. Age, stature, sex, and race are crucial; these determinations alone narrow the field greatly. Simply determining the sex of the deceased will cut the possibilities in half. If the bones are those of a fifty-something, six-foot, Caucasian male, the search can exclude any persons not fitting this profile. Once these characteristics are determined, the search turns toward individualizing characteristics. The presence of bony evidence of disease, congenital defects, or trauma is very important.
With an intact adult skeleton, the determination of sex can be made nearly 100 percent of the time, age to within five to ten years, height to within 1½ inches, and race much of the time. With only a partial skeleton or just a few bones, the accuracy of each of these determinations diminishes.
AGE 
To determine the age of the person when only bones are available, the forensic anthropologist looks at the teeth, the skull, and the maturity of the bone growth centers, as well as the normal age-related changes in the bones and joints. Since the analysis of each of these gives only an estimate of age, the examiner must in the end make his best guess. Age can be more accurately estimated in the young than in the mature individual. The teeth and bones in children and adolescents follow a predictable growth and maturation pattern. By assessing the stage of this development, a fairly narrow age range can be determined. Later in life, after the maturation process is completed, changes in the teeth and skeleton occur at a much slower rate. This leads to much broader ranges of age assessment.
Teeth are often examined first. Humans have two sets of teeth: twenty deciduous (baby) and thirty-two permanent (adult). Tooth development begins before birth. The formation, appearance, and loss of baby teeth and the appearance of permanent teeth occur in a known sequence. Charts are available that reveal this order; they can be used to estimate the age of a victim who was less than twelve years old at the time of death. With the exception of the third molars (wisdom teeth), the loss of deciduous teeth and the appearance of the permanent teeth are completed by about age twelve. The last teeth to appear are the wisdom teeth, which typically erupt by age eighteen.
This general timeline helps with assessing the age of any individual who was eighteen or younger at the time of death. For example, a skeleton that has all its permanent teeth, except the wisdom teeth, was likely between twelve and eighteen at the time of death. If the third molars have appeared, the teeth aren’t as useful to the examiner in determining age.
In adults, the skull is of little use for age estimation, but in infants it may be of some help, though not as much as once believed. An infant’s skull is actually in several pieces that with time fuse or meld together along jagged lines of separation known as suture lines. Logically, the pattern of the closure of these sutures would be useful, but unfortunately this fusion occurs in a widely variable pattern, so that age estimation is not that accurate.
Figure 4-1: Long bones. Human long bones consist of the diaphysis (shaft) and two epiphyseal end pieces. The two epiphyses (growth plates) bind these segments and are the location of bone growth. At maturity, the plates fuse and growth ceases. 
Figure 4-2: Pubic symphysis. The pubic symphysis is the frontal union of the right and left halves of the pelvis. Straightening and narrowing of the junction occurs with aging. 
If available, the anthropologist turns his attention to the body’s long bones in the arms and legs. These bones consist of three parts: the diaphysis (shaft) and the epiphyses at each end (see Figure 4-1). The growth plates (epiphyseal plates or ossification centers) are located near each end where the diaphysis and the epiphyses come together. Bones can continue to grow as long as these epiphyseal plates are “open.” When they “close” or ossify (become hard bone like the shaft), growth is no longer possible. The timing of this varies among individuals, but is typically completed by the time the person is in his mid–twenties, and it tends to occur a little earlier in females than in males. If the skeleton in question is small, with no fusion of the epiphyses, the person was likely a child. If the bones are that of a nearly grown individual, and if these growth plates are partially fused, then the person would have been a teenager or in his early twenties at death. If the growth plates are fully fused, the person was probably over twenty-five years of age.
The complete closure of the epiphyses in the various bones of the body occurs at different and predictable times. For example, the plates near the elbow close between ages twelve and fourteen, those of the hip and ankle around fifteen, and those of the shoulder between eighteen and twenty. This allows for fairly accurate age determination between the ages of about twelve and twenty.
Another marker of age is the changes that occur in the pubic symphysis (see Figure 4-2). The right and left pelvic bones join to the spinal column in back at the sacroiliac joints, and in the front to each other at the pubic symphysis. This union is by way of a thin band of cartilage that is slightly scalloped. With age, this cartilage band becomes more of a straight line. The straightening of this line is a rough indicator of age, but this is only useful to about age fifty.
Another important area to examine is the sternal end of the ribs. This is where the ribs join the breastbone (sternum). Early in life, the ends of the ribs are smooth and rounded, but with age they become pitted and develop sharper edges. The standard is to look at the ends of the third, fourth, and fifth ribs. Examination of these junctions can narrow age predication to one and a half years up to age thirty and within five years up to age seventy. After that, these changes are of little use. Also, the cartilage that connects the ribs to the sternum tends to ossify (become bony) with age, so this can be used as a crude indicator of age.
With age, bones tend to lose calcium and become less dense. That is, they weaken, soften, and become more prone to fractures. X-ray, photon absorptiometry, CT scanning, or MRI examination of the bones will reveal the density of the calcium and may help with determining the age. Diseases such as osteoporosis and malnutrition will lessen the bone density at any given age, and this fact must be considered in determining age from skeletal remains. Since this demineralization of the bones is affected by so many factors, this is only marginally useful for age determination.
Age also leads to the development of arthritis and other joint abnormalities. Arthritis is not commonly seen before age forty. After age sixty or so, ossification progresses in the cartilage of the ribs and larynx (voice box). This means that if significant arthritis changes are seen, the person was probably beyond age sixty at the time of death.
STATURE 
You might think that in order to determine the unknown person’s height you could simply measure the skeleton from top to bottom and that would be that. If a complete skeleton is present, that would work. But with only partial remains, this isn’t possible. Also, the height is just one part of the person’s stature. Was the person of slight or muscular build? That could make a crucial difference in identification. A 6-foot male who is thin would suggest one group of possible matches, while a 6-foot male who is muscular or obese would suggest another.
If one or more of the long bones are available, measurement of these can lead to an estimate of height. This technique is called allometry. For example, one rule of thumb is that the height is equal to five times the length of the humerus (upper arm bone). But there are also tables and formulas for each of the long bones available to help in estimating height. Though any long bone can be used, the best and most accurate are the femur (upper leg bone) and tibia (larger of the two lower leg bones). One set of formulas was developed by Genoves in 1967.
Using Femur and Tibia Length to Estimate Height in Centimeters 
(2.54 centimeters = 1 inch) 
Male:
femur length × 2.26 + 66.38 = height in centimeters 
tibia length × 1.96 + 93.75 = height in centimeters 
Female:
femur length × 2.59 + 49.74 = height in centimeters 
tibia length × 2.72 + 63.78 = height in centimeters 
But, what if the examiner only has fragments of these bones? Fortunately, other formulas have been worked out that allow the estimation of the bone length from fragments, and once this is determined, the estimated length can be used to calculate the overall height of the individual.
Once the height is estimated, the examiner tries to determine the person’s body type. There are no formulas here, just an experienced guess. If the bones are thick, particularly in the areas where muscles attach to the skeleton, the person was most likely to have had a muscular physique. If not, a slighter build is likely. Unfortunately, this is inexact at best.
Similarly, handedness can often be determined since the dominant side tends to have thicker, stronger bones. That is, the right arm and leg bones of a right-handed individual are usually thicker than the left.
SEX 
As opposed to the situation with age estimation, determining sex from skeletal remains of infants and children is more difficult than it is in adults. The reason for this is that gender-specific changes in the skeleton do not appear until puberty. After this, male and female bones grow differently and begin to take on sex-identifying characteristics. If the needed bones are available, the forensic anthropologist can use these variations to accurately determine the sex of skeletal remains.
The overall size and bone thickness of the male skeleton is greater than that of the female. This is not universal, though, since bone size and thickness is related to many things other than sex. Better nutrition and heavy physical activity lead to stronger bones regardless of sex. So a female who ate well and preformed manual labor might have a more male appearing skeleton than a male who had poor nutrition and rarely worked physically.
Figure 4-3: Pelvic bones. The female pelvis (A) is wider than the male (B). In addition, the sciatic notch is broader in females (C) than in males (D). 
Figure 4-4: The mandible. The posterior ramus of the mandible is curved in males, but straight in females. 
Still, the thickness of certain areas of some bones may be used to distinguish between males and females. In general, the diameters of the heads of the humerus, the radius (lower arm bone on the thumb side), and the femur are larger in males.
The most reliable bones in sex determination are those of the pelvis. The male pelvis is designed only for support and movement, while the female pelvis is adapted for childbirth (see Figures 4-3A and B). The female pelvis is wider and possesses an increased diameter of the pelvic outlet, which allows passage of the infant during childbirth. Also, the sciatic notch (where the sciatic and other nerves pass through on their way to the leg) is wider in females than in males (see Figures 4-3C and D). In addition, the backside of the pubic bone in women who have delivered a child may be scarred and irregular. This is due to the tearing and regrowth of ligaments that occurs during childbirth.
The skull is also helpful. Male skulls tend to have more distinct ridges and crests and to be larger and thicker, particularly in areas where facial and jaw muscles attach. In addition, the posterior ramus of the mandible (jawbone) in males is slightly curved, while in females it tends to be straight (see Figure 4-4).
As you can see, the ability to determine the sex of skeletal remains depends upon how many and which bones are present. If the skeleton is intact, the accuracy is extremely high. If only a hipbone or a mandible is found, the job of the forensic anthropologist is more difficult, but he can still provide a fairly accurate guess.
RACIAL CHARACTERISTICS 
The racial background of the person is very difficult, if not impossible, to determine since no single skeletal trait is racially distinct. Any classification is rough at best and is greatly altered by racial mixture. There are only three groups to which a given skeleton can be assigned: Caucasoid, Negroid, or Mongoloid.
Caucasoid individuals tend to have high, rounded or square skulls, straight faces, and narrow, protruding noses. On the other hand, those of Negroid or Mongoloid descent tend toward lower and narrower skulls and wider, flatter noses. Negroids tend to have proportionally longer arms and legs than do Caucasoids, while in Mongoloids the limbs are shorter. Also, Caucasoid individuals have a forward curve to their femurs, while in Negroid persons this bone is straighter.
The skeleton of an individual of mixed racial origin shares characteristics of the individual races in his ancestry. Often this racial admixture makes racial assignment impossible.
INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS 
The estimation of the age, stature, sex, and race of the remains greatly narrows the search for the identity of the unknown person, but to establish the true identity requires more information. Just knowing that the remains are those of a twelve- to eighteen-year-old, five-foot, left-handed, Caucasian female does not absolutely identify the individual, but it might narrow the focus to a handful of individuals. As with a corpse, this information is compared to the characteristics of anyone reported missing (except, with a skeleton rather than a body, this review would need to go back several years) and if someone with similar characteristics is found, a closer look is taken.
As with a more intact corpse, clothing remnants, jewelry, and burial artifacts, if present, may add information. Evidence of previous injuries, such as healed fractures or knife or gunshot wounds, which can fracture and nick bones, might be the key to identifying the remains. Comparing these types of findings with old medical records or X-rays of potential individuals may lead to a positive identification. As with intact corpses, many surgical appliances, such as artificial hips and pacemakers, can be found among the bones, and since these often possess traceable serial numbers, the identification can be secured from these.
Several diseases leave behind skeletal evidence. Primary bone cancers and those that metastasize (spread) to bone and such infectious processes as tuberculosis, syphilis, and osteomyelitis (bone infection) may leave behind characteristic findings. Bone disorders such as Paget’s disease and rickets are usually easily identified.
The finding of any of these injuries or diseases further narrows the possibilities. Of course, each of these indicators are much weaker identifying characteristics than are fingerprints, dental patterns, and DNA.
Although fingerprints are not available in skeletal remains, DNA and teeth often are. Dental patterns can be compared to old dental records, X-rays, and sometimes photographs. An entire set of teeth is not usually necessary for this comparison, but is preferred. In many cases DNA can be extracted from bones and teeth. Of course, both of these techniques require that old records or known samples of DNA exist.
One newer technique for identification is through the use of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), which will be discussed in Chapter Ten. Mitochondrial DNA is inherited unchanged along maternal lines for many centuries. It is very hardy and survives for great periods of time in decayed and skeletal remains. It is found in all the cells of the body, the pulp of the teeth, and even in the shaft of hair, a place that does not contain normal, or nuclear, DNA. If the identity of the corpse is suspected to be a particular individual, the mtDNA obtained from maternally related relatives, such as siblings, can be matched against that of the unknown corpse. If they share a common maternal ancestry, the mtDNA from each will match.
FACIAL RECONSTRUCTION 
When all of the above fails to identify the remains, facial reconstruction must be considered. If a likeness of the individual can be created and circulated, someone might recognize the person. Alternatively, if the search has been narrowed to a few individuals, photographs of these persons can be compared to the skull in question. This is called skull-to-photo superimposition.
Facial reconstruction is a fascinating art that often involves a forensic anthropologist, dentist, and artist or sculptor. Facial reconstruction from a complete or partial skull involves recreating a two-dimensional image on paper or a computer screen or sculpting one that is three-dimensional. In either case, the goal is to produce an image that is an approximate likeness of the deceased.
For the sculptor, the skull or a cast of the skull serves as the framework. A clay model is then created one layer at a time. Studies have determined the average skin thickness over certain bony landmarks of the skull. Small spacers of this thickness are placed in these areas and are then connected by strips of clay. This latticework is then filled in and contoured. Needless to say, this requires the hand and eye of an artist.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: JOSEF MENGELE’S SKULL 
Josef Mengele, the Nazi Angel of Death, conducted an array of unspeakable human experiments on prisoners of Hitler’s Third Reich and alone oversaw the deaths of perhaps 400,000 people. Yet, when the Russians took the concentration camps at Auschwitz, few people knew the name Mengele. In fact, it was not until many years later, with the capture of Adolf Eichmann, that Mengele became the prime target of Nazi hunters.
From the 1960s through the 1980s, sightings and rumors placed Mengele at various times in Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay, and he became the world’s single most sought-after war criminal. In 1985 rumors of his impending capture took on a fever pitch. Would the Angel of Death finally be brought to trial and be forced to answer for his crimes? Unfortunately, no. Wolfram and Liselotte Bossert, a German couple living in Brazil, showed authorities a grave near the village of Embu, stating that the body beneath the soil was Josef Mengele.
Scientists from the United States and Germany, as well as a team of experts from the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Vienna, Austria, took part in the examination of the skeletal remains. They determined that the bones were that of a Caucasian male, whose size and age matched that of Mengele. Unfortunately, Mengele’s SS file was sketchy at best and in particular his hand-drawn 1938 dental chart was inexact. It revealed that Mengele had twelve filings, but did not pinpoint their locations. Also, it made no mention of his gap-toothed smile.
German forensic anthropologist Richard Helmer had been working with photographic superimposition. He took a photograph of the skull from the grave and marked over thirty identifying points. He then superimposed a known photo of Mengele over the skull photo and determined that the match was perfect. He was convinced that the bones were those of Mengele. Final confirmation came in 1992 with DNA matching of materials obtained from the bones with samples taken from Mengele’s relatives.
However, many problems plague this process. Hair and eye color, hairstyle, and the presence or absence of facial hair is not known. Some features, such as the nose and ears, are made of cartilage and may be absent. To draw or sculpt these features requires a “best guess.” Similarly, the thickness of the skin and the amount of body fat must also be estimated, and errors in this estimation may greatly affect the final model.
If a missing individual who fits the general characteristics of the remains is identified, and if a photograph of this person is available, a skull-to-photo superimposition may be used to confirm the identification. Basically, the photo is superimposed over a similar-sized photo of the skull and the bony landmarks are compared. This can rarely provide a conclusive match but it can eliminate certain candidates. If the photo reveals that the eyes are too widely spaced, the nose too long, or the chin is of a different contour, the skull is not that of the suspect individual. On the other hand, if all these features match, the suspect individual cannot be excluded.
This technique was used to help solve one of the greatest mysteries of the twentieth century: Was Josef Mengele really dead?
PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPARIS ONS AND AGE PROGRESSIONS 
Most often, the forensic anthropologist is involved with identifying skeletal remains, but he may also be asked to determine if two photos are of the same person. Often these photos were taken years or decades apart and vary widely in quality and technique. Sometimes one photo is from a surveillance camera, while another a family snapshot. Though everyone’s face undergoes age-related changes, there are certain features that do not change.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: JOHN LIST’S FACE 
In 1971, John List lived in a large home in Westfield, New Jersey, with his wife, his three teenage children, and his mother. Neighbors noticed that they had not seen the List family for some time and that the home seemed deserted except for the fact that lights throughout the house blazed brightly every night. The police investigated and found the bodies of Helen List and the three children neatly placed on sleeping bags in a room near the back of the house. In an upstairs bedroom, they found the body of John’s mother, Alma. Each had been shot. John List was nowhere to be found.
The police did find five addressed envelopes that contained letters explaining List’s rationale for committing the multiple murders. Apparently, he was on the brink of bankruptcy and did not want his family subjected to the humiliation of a life on welfare, so he spared them this by killing them. Two days later, his car turned up in the long-term parking at New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport.
Thirteen years later, Bernard Tracy, who was still investigating the case, was no closer to finding the fugitive, so in an attempt to rekindle interest in the case he approached Weekly World News, a supermarket tabloid. They ran a story on the John List case on February 17, 1986. Again, no new information came forth.
However, Wanda Flannery of Aurora, Colorado, thought the printed photograph that accompanied the story resembled her neighbor, Bob Clark. She mentioned this to Bob’s wife Delores, who scoffed at the idea that her churchgoing husband could be a murderer. Shortly thereafter the Clarks ran into financial difficulty due to Bob’s poor handling of their money and relocated to Richmond, Virginia.
In 1987, FBI specialist Gene O’Donnell was asked to join the effort. Using the latest computer technology and the photograph of John List, O’Donnell was able to “age” the photo by adding gray, receding hair and fleshly jowls. He also included thick-rimmed glasses similar to those List wore in the photo. Bernard Tracy then approached the TV show America’s Most Wanted; they hired forensic sculptor Frank A. Bender to fashion a bust of what John List might look like some eighteen years after his last known photograph. Criminal psychologist Dr. Richard Walter was brought in to offer a profile of John List as an aid to reconstructing his likely current image. He felt that List’s religious background would make it unlikely that he had undergone any plastic surgery and that his lifestyle would not be one of diet and exercise. This was valuable information since either could alter List’s pattern of aging.
On May 21, 1989, America’s Most Wanted aired the John List case along with O’Donnell’s “aged” photo and Bender’s bust. Over 250 calls came in. One came from an anonymous caller in Colorado who said that John List was living in Richmond, Virginia, under the name of Bob Clark. The caller later turned out to be a relative of Wanda Flannery. Fingerprints proved that Bob Clark and John List were the same individual. On May 1, 1990, nearly two decades after murdering his family, John List received five life sentences.
The examiner superimposes one photo over the other and compares fixed structures such as orbital ridges (eyebrow area), nasal openings, and chin contour. A match suggests that the photos could be of the same individual. This is not conclusive, but suggestive evidence.
The forensic anthropologist or artist may also be asked to “age” a photograph. Let’s say a suspect or a missing person has not been seen for years, even decades. Using an old photograph of the individual, the examiner attempts to determine what the individual might look like years later. This has been successful in finding missing persons and tracking down suspects on many occasions. Mostly this “aging” process is guesswork, but, in recent years, experience has increased so that a number of individuals have become quite skilled in this technique. There are even computer programs to aid the process.
Often, a psychiatric profile will be done on the missing person. This is a look into the type of person he was, what type of work he did, what his dietary and exercise habits were, whether he is likely to undergo cosmetic surgery or not, and many other things. The artist uses the information from the psychiatric profile to help speculate what facial changes have likely occurred in the individual over the years.
A major triumph of this technique was realized in the case of John List.
TIME SINCE DEATH  
Taphonomy comes from the Greek words taphos, which means “grave or burial,” and nomos, which means “rules or laws.” So, taphonomy means the “rules of burial” and is the study of what happens to the human body after death. How the body decays, if it does, and how it becomes skeletonized (deteriorated to the point that only bones remain) are the domain of taphonomy. As we will see in Chapter Five, this field of study might involve the forensic anthropologist and odontologist, as well as the ME, archeologist, climatologist, botanist, entomologist, and others. Here we will look at older skeletal remains, and then, in Chapter Five, we will address more recent deaths where the examiner studies more or less intact bodies.
When confronted with skeletal remains, one of the first questions the anthropologist must answer is: How old are these bones? This is critical to any forensic involvement. Bones that are hundreds of years old have no forensic use. But those that are two years or twenty or even fifty years old may very well have forensic use.
Let me make one thing very clear so you won’t make this mistake in your story: When reduced to bones, the corpse does not look like an intact skeleton. You won’t find a skeleton sitting in chair, or behind the wheel of a submerged car. The reason is that, as the body’s tissues decay, so do the tendons and ligaments that hold the skeleton together. This means it will disarticulate and be a pile of individual bones.
So, how long does it take for a corpse to become completely skeletonized? As previously mentioned, it depends on the environment, with temperature and humidity being the most important factors. In a swamp in Florida, it can take as little as two weeks, while in the deep forests of the north, it could take years.
For the forensic anthropologist, estimating the time since death is never easy and it becomes increasingly more difficult with each passing day. There are a few things that can help, however.
Artifacts of the burial site might offer telling clues. Clothing, jewelry, casket materials, and burial artifacts may indicate the period of the burial. For example, arrowheads, or musket balls would suggest a different time frame than would synthetic materials and plastic objects. Pages from a newspaper or a magazine would set the outside range for the time of death.
Chemical analyses of the bones, such as determining their nitrogen levels, can also help. Nitrogen is found in proteins and in their amino acid building blocks. Bones consist of a protein matrix to which calcium is attached. As bones slowly deteriorate, the protein, and thus the nitrogen, level decreases. Measuring the level of the remaining nitrogen can give an estimate of how many years or decades the bones have been interred. This is inexact since the rate of protein and nitrogen loss is affected by temperature and moisture, the same two elements that most affect body decay rate.
Bones tend to absorb fluorine and uranium from the soil and from ground water. Measurement of these levels may also be a crude indicator of time.
Another measurement is based on the fact that different amino acids disappear from bones at different rates. Analysis of fresh bones may yield as many as fifteen different amino acids, while those that are a hundred or more years old may have only seven. Two of the longest surviving amino acids are proline and hydroxyproline. Their absence would suggest that the bones had been buried many hundreds of years.
Ultraviolet (UV) light is another useful tool. Fresh bones fluoresce (glow) a pale blue color under UV light. If the bone is cut crosswise, this glow can be seen across the full thickness of the bone. This fluorescence is lost over time, starting with the surface and then inside the bone. Since the long bones are hollow, this loss of fluorescence occurs from the outside surface and the inside surface toward the middle area of the bone. A bone that is less than one hundred years old may glow across its full thickness, but with time, this fluorescent band becomes progressively thinner until, after several hundred years, it disappears (see Figure 4-5). This offers only a crude estimate of bone age and is of more concern to anthropologists than to forensic scientists.
Figure 4-5: Bone fluorescence. Bones lose their fluo-rescence under UV light from the exterior and interior surfaces inward. (A) A bone less than one hundred years old will fluoresce through its full thickness. (B) After several hundred years all fluorescence is lost. (C) In between these time limits, the central band grows progressively thinner. 
Radioactive isotopes help age bones. Carbon-14 (C-14) dating is of little use in forensics since its ranges are too broad. The half-life (time it takes to decay by 50 percent) for C-14 is 5,700 years. It is useful for dating something that is many hundreds or thousands of years old, but not for shorter time periods. However, other radioactive materials may be helpful. With the testing and use of nuclear devices in World War II and the continued testing throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the global environment saw an increase in C-14, strontium-90, cesium-137, and tritium (a radioisotope of hydrogen). The finding of increased amounts of one or more of these in bones means that the victim died after about 1950. Those who died before this were not exposed to the environmental increase in these isotopes and would show no such elevation.
BURNED BONES 
Bones that have been burned, either before or after complete skeletonization of the corpse has occurred, present special problems for the anthropologist. Under normal circumstances, he will use the texture and color of the bones to help with his estimate of age, but with burning, this texture and color is altered. However, these changes might provide clues regarding the intensity and the duration of the fire, and this might provide some useful investigative clues as to the cause and manner of death. Indirect or brief exposure to the fire causes only yellow-brown discoloration of the bones with or without streaks of soot. With direct exposure to the fire, the bones char and blacken and might crack or splinter. With prolonged direct contact, the bones can be reduced to white ashes. Under these circumstances, the anthropologist may have only a few remnants to work with. To complicate things further, the dessication (drying out) of the bones by the heat of the fire causes them to shrink, making an accurate estimate of stature very difficult.
CAUSE AND MANNER OF DEATH  
Occasionally, the skeleton offers clues to the cause and manner of death. As with the intact corpse, this determination can open pathways of investigation. And whether the victim died from blunt trauma or a gunshot might prove critical to the investigation and ultimate solution of the crime.
With blunt-force injuries, such as falls or blows from a blunt object, the injured bone may show fractures, fragmentation, and impact marks (dents and depressions). Sometimes these bony injuries suggest what type of object was used. A baseball bat, a tire iron, and a hammer each leave behind different depressions in a skull.
With sharp-force injuries, such as with an axe or a knife, cut surfaces, nicks, and chips where the blade struck the bone might be visible. Occasionally, metallic remnants from the weapon can be seen along the cut surface.
Gunshots may leave entry and exit holes in the skull, and gouges and other defects in the ribs, spine, and other bones. Finding a bullet or two would help. Sometimes, measuring the entrance hole will estimate the caliber of the bullet that caused the injury. Tracking any injuries to the bones or finding an imbedded bullet may allow for an estimation of the bullet’s path and, thus, a determination of which organs were likely damaged.
Of course, blunt objects, knives, and bullets can lead to death without impacting the skeleton, and many deaths by strangulation and most natural deaths leave behind no skeletal evidence. This means that the skeleton might not offer any clues as to the cause and manner of death.
One of the problems facing the examiner is whether the bony injuries he sees occurred around the time of death or many years earlier. For example, a skull fracture that occurred years before death and one that occurred at the time of death may mean two entirely different things. Often, the forensics team can make such a distinction.
Fractured bones heal in time. This healing is by way of callus (scar) formation at the area of injury. Callus formation takes months to complete. And, of course, no healing occurs after death. So, a fracture with a robust callus must have occurred months before death. On the other hand, perimortem (around the time of death) fractures show no signs of healing, so there is no callus formation. Thus, a skull fracture that showed no signs of healing could have occurred around the time of death and may indeed be related to the cause of death. This means that a blow to the head or a fall could have led to the individual’s death. Conversely, well-healed fractures could not be directly related to the cause of death.
But, what of fractures that occur years after death, after the skeleton has been exposed to nature for a considerable time period? Bones left in nature tend to undergo trauma from natural forces as well as from predators. Often, the examiner can determine when the fractures occurred.
Living bones possess moisture, living protein, and fat, which make them less brittle. Fractures tend to be spiral or “greenstick” in nature. Bones that have desiccated are very brittle and tend to crumble more readily and fracture cleanly, usually parallel or at a cross section to the long axis of the bone. By examining the nature of any fractures, the forensic anthropologist may be able to distinguish premortem from distant post-mortem fractures.
Based on the timing and nature of skeletal injuries, the forensic anthropologist and the ME might be able to determine the cause of death and whether it was self-inflicted, accidental, or homicidal in nature, but determining the manner of death is not always easy or accurate. What if the findings suggest that the individual died as a result of a skull fracture? Was this from a blow to the head (homicidal), a fall (accidental), or a fall after a heart attack or stroke (natural)?
BODY LOCATION  
With the exception of some photographic comparisons, all these forensic identification techniques require a corpse or skeletal remains. No body, nothing to work with. Often a discovered body is what instigates this identification process. But sometimes, investigators know a homicide has occurred, or has likely occurred, but they can’t find the corpse. The Laci Peterson case is an example. When Laci, who was eight months pregnant at the time, went missing on Christmas Eve 2002, in Modesto, California, it was not long before it became obvious that she had been murdered. Authorities launched a search of her neighborhood and the bay where her husband, Scott, had been fishing. In April 2003, the bodies of Laci and her unborn son Conner washed up on shore in San Francisco Bay. Scott Peterson was later convicted of the double murder.
In homicides, finding and examining the corpse is critical. Searchers use a number of low- and high-tech location methods. All evidence is used to narrow the search area, including the victim’s work and leisure habits and witness statements. The victim may work several miles from home, so searching along this route would be undertaken. Maybe he frequently ran or walked in a nearby wooded area. Or maybe the suspect’s vehicle was spotted or some of the victim’s clothing was found in a remote area. These bits of information can greatly focus the search.
One basic rule is to “look downhill” for a burial site. Let’s say it is believed that the body in question was buried near a remote roadway. In the area, the terrain rises above the road on one side and falls away on the other. Search downhill. Why? It is much easier to carry a body downhill than up. It’s just that simple.
Once the area of search has been defined, a systematic approach to covering the area should be followed. Freshly turned dirt, trenches, elevations or depressions in the terrain may be helpful. Fresh graves tend to be elevated above the surrounding area, while older ones may be depressed. This is due to settling of the soil, decay of the body, and collapse of the skeleton. Interestingly, the depth of the depression is greater if the body is deeply buried. This is likely due to the larger amount of turned dirt, which is subject to a greater degree of settling. Another factor could be that in deeper graves, the increased weight of the dirt over the corpse causes earlier and more complete skeletal collapse.
Tracking dogs, if provided with an article of the victim’s clothing, may be able to follow a scent trail to the burial site. Specially trained cadaver dogs search for the scent of decaying flesh. They can often locate bodies in shallow graves or in water. Deeper graves may present problems.
Another important clue may come from changes in the vegetation over the gravesite. The turning of the soil in the digging process and the presence of the body change the soil conditions in the area over the grave. Changes in compaction, moisture, aeration, and temperature may attract plant species that differ from those around the grave. Or, the plants typical for the area may be present but the changed soil conditions may increase the thickness and richness of their growth. This may be visible, particularly from the air.
Aerial reconnaissance and photography can be coupled with thermal imaging. Freshly turned dirt loses heat faster than normally compacted soil; it appears “colder” by such a device. Alternatively, a decaying body releases heat, which may reveal a measurable difference when compared to the surrounding area. So, the thermal images are inspected for either cold or warm spots, and these areas are then subjected to a more aggressive search.
If a suspect area such as a mound or depression is found, special devices that locate sources of heat and nitrogen, both byproducts of the decay process, or that measure changes in the physical properties of the soil, may be employed. Ground-penetrating radar can “see” into the ground and often locate a buried body. Measurement of the electrical conductivity may prove helpful— a buried body often adds moisture to the soil, and the moisture increases the soil’s electrical conductivity. Two metal probes are placed in the soil, and an electrical current is passed between them and measured. Changes in this current may indicate where the body is buried.
Magnetic devices may also be employed. A simple metal detector may locate the victim’s jewelry or belt buckle.
A special device called a magnetometer, which measures the magnetic properties of soil, can also be helpful. Soil contains small amounts of iron, so it possesses a low level of magnetic reaction. Since the area where the body is buried has proportionally less soil (the corpse takes up space), it will exhibit a lower level of magnetic reactivity. The magnetometer is passed above the soil and locates any areas that have low magnetic reactivity.
MULTIPLE CORPSES  
If identifying a single skeletal corpse is difficult, mass graves and scenes of major catastrophic events obviously present special problems for the forensic anthropologist. Not only will he have difficulty identifying whose bones are present, but he may have trouble determining exactly how many bodies are present. This is particularly difficult in mass graves where a jumble of skeletal remains is found. The forensic anthropologist may never be able to ascertain the exact number of victims, but he can at least determine the minimum number. For example, if he finds ninety skulls, jawbones, or hip girdles, he can conclude that a minimum of ninety people were interred in the site. There could be more, but not less.
In these situations, each bone must be analyzed using whichever of the techniques discussed in this chapter is deemed appropriate. This is why identifying skeletal remains found in mass graves is a long and arduous process. 
