---

author: ["D. P. Lyle"]
title: "Howdunit Forensics - index_split_017.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "D. P. Lyle - Howdunit Forensics"
tags: ["wound", "victim", "injury", "death", "may", "fracture", "skin", "bullet", "brain", "skull", "might", "blow", "pattern", "blood", "often", "trauma", "body", "type", "see", "head", "abrasion", "bite", "figure", "one", "bruise"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitForensics-indexsplit017html

---


Forensics: A Guide for Writers
CHAPTER 7  
BODILY HARM: 
IDENTIFYING WOUNDS 
Trauma to the human body comes in many forms: gunshots, stabbings, blunt-force injuries, thermal and electrical burns, and bite marks. Rape and abuse, traumatic events themselves, also frequently involve one or more of these types of injuries. In this chapter we will look at each of these.
GUNS AND BULLETS  
If you’ve ever fired a high-powered handgun, rifle, or a shotgun, you’re likely to have vivid memories of the first time you pulled the trigger. The shock of the sudden explosive discharge and the kick of the recoil were probably more jolting than you anticipated. Even more shocking is the damage a bullet can do to a human.
Gunshot wounds (GSWs) are a common cause of death in accidental, suicidal, and homicidal shootings (see Chapter Six). The mechanism of death depends upon the location and the severity of the injury the bullet produces. For a gunshot to be immediately fatal, extensive trauma to the brain, the heart, or the upper spinal cord must occur. Otherwise death is slower and is typically due to exsanguination (bleeding to death) or a secondary wound infection. The manner of death depends upon the intent of the person discharging the weapon. Obviously, death from a gunshot wound can’t be a natural death, but if the shooter did not intend to harm himself or others, it would likely be deemed accidental in nature. If someone else shot him it could be accidental or homicidal.
As we saw in Chapter Three when discussing the autopsy, bullets that strike a human can be tricky and behave in all sorts of odd ways. A gunshot wound to the head does not necessarily result in damage to the brain. The bullet can flatten against the skull and never penetrate the bone or enter the brain, or it can ricochet off the skull and leave the body entirely, or it can burrow beneath the scalp and be found some distance from the entrance wound. The bullet is more likely to burrow beneath the scalp if it approaches from an angle of less than 90 degrees. For example, a bullet may strike the victim’s forehead, penetrate the skin, careen off the skull, burrow beneath the scalp, and come to rest at the back of the person’s head.
The same thing can occur if the victim is shot in the chest. The bullet might strike the sternum or a rib and flatten against the bone, or ricochet in any direction. It might leave the body or burrow beneath the skin, never entering the chest, or be deflected upward into the neck or downward into the abdomen. It’s very unpredictable.
For this reason, whether the victim is among the living in a hospital emergency department or on the coroner’s autopsy table, if the bullet or bullets cannot be readily located, X-rays are taken of the chest, abdomen, and sometimes the entire body. Since lead bullets are readily visible under X-rays, the surgeon or the ME can locate them in this manner.
When the coroner examines a gunshot victim, he must determine how many wounds are present. He must locate all entrance and exit wounds (if any) and trace the path of each bullet through the victim’s body, if possible. Only with this information can he determine which bullet, if any, led to the victim’s death. This information may be critical to the prosecution of the crime.
DETERMINING RESPONSIBILITY 
Let’s say a man is shot several times in the arm, the leg, twice in the chest, and once in the head. The shooter claims the victim threatened him and he was merely protecting himself. But, the crime scene analysis reveals that the limb and chest wounds occurred while the victim was standing and the shot to the head came after he was on the floor. The initial shots could indeed be self defense, the headshot less so, since the “attacker” was down and the shooter could have fled or called for help.
But, which was the fatal shot? If one of the bullets to the chest severely damaged the heart and led to death, the subsequent shot to the head would be of less consequence since the victim would have died anyway. In this case, a first-degree murder conviction might be difficult. But, if neither of the chest wounds was immediately fatal, the shooter could be facing a murder charge. The prosecution would likely contend that the shooter did not have to fire the fatal bullet and that he did so in a calculated and premeditated fashion. What charges are brought depends upon how the ME assesses the injuries.
This becomes even more important if two shooters are involved. If one assailant fired the shots to the victim’s limbs and chest and the other the single shot to his head, the ME’s opinion as to which was the fatal shot would be crucial to the prosecution. The person who fired the lethal shot would likely face the more serious charges.
ENTRY WOUNDS 
A bullet that harms someone always leaves an entry wound, simply because to do harm the bullet must strike, and usually enter, the person at some point. However, if the bullet remains within the victim, there will be no exit wound.
Though not always easy, the ME must attempt to distinguish entry wounds from exit wounds and determine which bullets followed which path through the victim.
The characteristics of wounds produced by a gunshot depend on several factors, including the distance between the victim and the gun’s muzzle, the caliber and velocity of the bullet, the angle at which the bullet enters, and whether the bullet remains within the victim or passes completely through and exits the body. This later situation is often termed a “through-and-through” gunshot wound.
When a gun is fired, the gunpowder or smokeless powder explodes, forcing the bullet from the cartridge and down the gun’s barrel. But, the bullet is not the only thing that leaves the barrel. Hot gases and particles of burned and unburned gunpowder are also ejected from the muzzle.
The gases are predominantly carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen oxide. Mixed with these gases are certain components of the primer. The most important of these are the heavy metals lead, bismuth, and antimony, which are useful when testing for gunshot residue (GSR). The particulate matter is predominantly burned and unburned powder and soot. 
Figure 7-1: Gun muzzle output. A fired gun expels the bullet, burned and unburned powder, and hot gases. Which of these mark the entry wound depends on the distance between the muzzle and the victim. 
Each of these ejected materials travels a different distance from the muzzle (see Figure 7-1). The hot gases may travel only a few inches, the particulate matter a foot or two, and, of course, the bullet a considerable distance. The character of the entry wound is affected by which of these components actually contact the skin. The ME can use this information to determine the distance between the gun’s muzzle and the point of entry at the moment the gun discharged.
The anatomy of the entrance wound is different depending on how close the muzzle is to the skin (see Figure 7-2). The resulting wound is different from weapon to weapon, but in general if the muzzle is two or more feet away from the victim, the entrance wound is a small hole, smaller than the bullet due to the elastic quality of skin. A blue-black bruising effect forms a halo around the entry point (called an abrasion collar) along with some black smudging where the skin literally wipes the bullet clean of the burned powder, grime, and oil residue it picks up as it passes through the barrel. This smudging is often easily wiped away with a wet cloth.
If the muzzle is between six inches and two feet from the point of entry, there might also be tattooing or stippling of the skin. This is due to burned and unburned powder that is discharged from the muzzle. These tiny particles embed in the skin and cause tiny hemorrhages (red dots of blood within the skin) in a speckled pattern around the wound. These cannot be wiped off because the particles are actually embedded (tattooed) into the skin. The breadth of scatter, or spread, of this stippling increases as the distance between the muzzle and the entry point increases (see Figure 7-2B). The tattooing resulting from a gunshot inflicted from a distance of ten or twelve inches will be compact and dense, while that from a shot delivered from eighteen to twenty-four inches will be broader and less dense.
Figure 7-2: Gunshot entry wounds. The anatomy of an entry wound depends on the distance between the muzzle and the entry point. If far away (A), the wound may be a simple hole with a faint abrasion collar. If closer (B), there might be stippling or tattooing, which becomes more dense the shorter the distance is (C). With contact wounds, the skin is torn by the hot gases into a stellate pattern (D). 
If the muzzle is only a few inches away (see Figure 7-2C), the stippling will be very compact and partially obliterated by the charring from the hot gases. Here, the skin around the entry wound is burned and blackened by the heat from the expelled gases. In addition, the carbon monoxide in the gases combines with hemoglobin and myoglobin (iron-containing compounds that reside in the blood and muscle tissues, respectively). This combination produces carboxyhemoglobin and car-boxymyoglobin. These compounds are bright red in color and impart this to the surrounding tissues. Thus, a gunshot from a very close distance will produce a hole, a compact area of stippling, a surrounding area of charring, and a bright red hue to the wounded tissues.
A contact gunshot wound (see Figure 7-2D) occurs when the gun’s muzzle is pressed against the skin as it is fired. In this circumstance, the hot gases and particulate matter are driven directly into the skin, producing greater charring. Also, the rapidly expanding gases rip the skin in a star-shaped or stellate pattern. Since the gases cannot expand the gun’s metal barrel, nor can they force their way very deeply into the tissues, they take the path of least resistance by expanding laterally in every direction and tearing the skin in a jagged star pattern. This is particularly true if the contact wound is over a bone such as the skull. Thus, a contact wound rips the skin in a classic stellate pattern, chars the skin severely, and produces the bright red tissue color as described above.
The entry wound made by the bullet is not always round. If the bullet enters at an angle other than 90 degrees, the wound may be somewhat elliptical. Or if the bullet strikes another object, such as a window or wall or another person, and then ricochets into the victim, it may lose its spin and begin to tumble or gyrate. This is called yawing. The wound in this circumstance may be difficult to distinguish from the typically larger and more irregular exit wounds.
So, why is all this important? If the person is dead and the gun that fired the bullet is found, who cares how far away it was? Let’s look at a simple scenario to see why this determination is critical.
Say that a victim is found shot in the head, the gun is lying on the bed beside him, and a suicide note is spread open on the dresser. But what if the ME’s examination of the entry wound indicates that the muzzle was not held against the victim’s head but rather was at least two feet away? Try holding your hand such that the tip of your finger is two feet from the side of your head. If not impossible, it is at least awkward and not the position someone would likely hold a gun.
Further, what if the angle of entry indicates that the gun muzzle was not only two feet away, but was also such that the muzzle must have been pointed at the back of the victim’s head? It simply isn’t possible for the victim to have held the weapon in that position. This means that someone else did. The suicide might now be a homicide.
EXIT WOUNDS 
Exit wounds are typically larger than entry wounds and result from the bullet lacerating (cutting or tearing) the tissues as it forces its way up and out through the skin. The shape and size of the wound depends on the size, speed, and shape of the bullet. Soft lead bullets are easily deformed as they enter and pass through the body, particularly if the bullet strikes any bony structures during its passage. If so, the bullet may become severely misshapen and produce more extensive tissue damage, often resulting in a gaping, irregular exit wound. Similarly, if the bullet strikes a hard surface such as a brick wall or metal railing before entry, it might be significantly deformed before it enters the victim. This may lead not only to a large irregular exit wound, but also a larger entry wound. Hollow-point bullets have a depression or hollowed area in their noses, which causes greater deformation of the bullet, more tissue damage, and larger exit wounds.
The opposite is true with jacketed bullets. Such bullets might be completely or partially covered with a metal, Teflon, or other hard material. These are typically high-velocity bullets with extraordinary penetrating power and they tend to pass directly through the victim with little change in their structure. In this case, the exit wound may be small and resemble a typical entry wound. The ME might not be able to distinguish between the entry and the exit wound. These types of jacketed bullets can also pass through protective bulletproof vests and have earned the name “cop killers.”
A shored exit wound, where the tissues at the exit point are supported, may also give the ME problems in distinguishing entry wounds from exit wounds. The typically ragged nature of most exit wounds is due to the bullet ripping its way through the skin. But if the skin is supported by tight clothing made of materials like leather or woven fabrics, or if the victim is against a wall or other structure, the skin will be less likely to tear and the exit wound will be smaller and less ragged, and will appear more like an entry wound.
SHOTGUN WOUND PATTERNS 
A shotgun expels a cluster of shot (small round beads) rather than a single bullet, which leads to multiple entry wounds. As with other guns, it might be critical to determine the distance between the muzzle and the victim, since this may distinguish between a murder and a suicidal or accidental shooting. It may also support or refute a suspect or witness statement.
Rather than the characteristics of the wounds, the most important factor in making this determination is the spread pattern of the shot. A general rule is that the shot spreads an inch for every three feet it travels. This depends greatly upon the choke applied to the barrel. The choke is an alteration in the diameter of the end of the barrel, which concentrates the shot pattern. There are four degrees of choke (from narrowest to widest): full, modified, improved cylinder, and cylinder-bore. The last is no narrowing or choking of the barrel at all. The barrel may be sawed off, which greatly increases the scatter of the shot.
There is no truly scientific way to determine the distance between the muzzle and the victim for shotgun blasts. The best way is to fire the suspect weapon, using the same ammunition type, from several distances until you find the distance that most closely matches the shot pattern found at the crime scene. This will approximate the distance from which the murder weapon was fired.
The estimated distance between the victim and the muzzle is often critical in the ME’s assessment of the manner of death. For example, if the shotgun that caused the death of the victim is tested and the spread pattern indicates that the muzzle must have been approximately six feet from the victim, then suicidal and accidental shootings are ruled out. This would likely lead the ME to state that the shooting was homicidal.
SHARP-FORCE INJURIES  
Sharp-force injuries, also called penetrating injuries, come from any weapon that is pointed or possesses a sharp edge. Knives, scissors, axes, swords, ice picks, forks, wooden stakes, and other edged or pointed instruments fit the bill. Other than a stab wound to the brain or to the upper part of the spinal cord, both of which are very rare, only a stab wound to the heart could cause immediate death. Otherwise, death arrives more slowly and is most often due to excessive bleeding. Much later, death can result from secondary wound infections.
Just as we saw with gunshot wounds, when faced with fatal penetrating injuries, the ME must determine the cause and manner of death. To do this, he examines the corpse and locates each and every wound, then determines what types of weapons were likely used and which wounds were potentially lethal. With a single stab wound to the heart, this is easy. But if the victim has received multiple wounds, the ME’s work becomes more difficult.
In this situation, the ME’s goal is to determine the sequence of the injuries and to estimate which wound or wounds were the likely killing injury. Again, in homicides with more than one assailant, this becomes critical, since the deliverer of the fatal wound could face the more serious charges.
Once he has nailed down the actual cause of death, the ME looks at the manner of death. Stabs, cuts, and chopping wounds can be accidental, suicidal, or homicidal in nature. The ME will use the nature, location, and number of wounds to make this distinction whenever possible.
Sharp-force wounds can be divided into three general types: stab wounds, incised or cut wounds, and chop wounds.
STAB WOUNDS 
Stab wounds are caused by pointed instruments—knives are the most common. Other instruments frequently used are ice picks, scissors, swords, and even screwdrivers.
Deaths from stab wounds are most often homicidal, but can also be accidental. They are rarely suicidal. If the victim slipped and fell onto a pointed object, causing a fatal wound, the manner of death would be accidental. The ME would need to determine that such a fall took place and exclude the possibility that the victim had been pushed onto the object, or that he had been stabbed and then fell. These latter two situations would be homicidal.
The reason that suicide by stabbing is uncommon is that it is extremely difficult for someone to stab himself with enough force to be fatal. Not to mention that it hurts. For this reason, if the wounds are suicidal, the deeper, more severe punctures are typically associated with smaller, shallower wounds called hesitation wounds. These vary greatly in size and depth, as if the individual were working up the courage to make the final stabs. When the ME encounters these hesitation wounds, suicide must be considered.
The main characteristics of stab wounds are that they are deeper than they are wide. For the ME, measuring the depth of the wound is much easier than assessing its width. Using a probe and very carefully plumbing the depth of the wound, being careful not to alter it, he can fairly accurately estimate its depth. But this doesn’t give him the exact length of the blade. Only half of the blade could have been thrust into the victim, so this measurement is only the minimum length of the blade. It can be longer, but not shorter.
If the knife had been thrust to the hilt, it could have left a patterned abrasion of the hand guard around the wound. The hand guard is the piece of metal between the handle and the blade that keeps the user’s hand from sliding down onto the blade. If this impacts the skin with enough force, it can leave a bruise or abrasion that matches the guard in shape and size. In this situation, the ME can state that the measured depth of the wound reflects the actual length of the blade. This also gives him the shape and size of the hand guard, which might help determine the type of knife used.
The width of the blade is more problematic. The elastic nature of human skin often causes it to contract around the wound once the weapon is removed, making the wound much smaller in appearance. On the other hand, some people, particularly the elderly, have poor skin elasticity and the wound may actually gape open and appear larger than it is. The blade also may be removed at an angle that is different from its entry angle, thus distorting the wound. Sometimes a knife twists or turns as it is withdrawn. This may produce Yor L-shaped wounds.
Other factors that affect the character of the wound are the angle of the stab, movement of the knife within the wound, and the characteristics of the blade itself. And of course, the victim might move and distort the wound. The victim may turn, twist, deflect the blows, strike back, or try to run. Each of these actions could change the nature of any wounds received.
This brings up the subject of defensive wounds. These are the wounds inflicted by the attacker on a victim who is attempting to defend himself. Stabs, cuts, and slices on the victim’s hands and arms indicate that he tried to parry the stabs. These are usually found on the palms of the hands and the ulnar side (little-finger side) of the forearms. They effectively rule out an accidental or suicidal manner of death.
Most of the time, determining the nature of the blade that made the wound is impossible. But with a clean stab wound, the ME might be able to measure the depth and width of the wound and occasionally determine if the blade were straight, curved, or serrated on one edge. If a double-edged blade was used, the wound might be pointed on each end, whereas with a single-edged blade, one end might be pointed and the other squared. Most of the wounds the ME sees are single-edged, since double-edged blades are rarely used.
Some stabbing instruments leave behind distinctive wounds. An ice pick makes small, round wounds; a barbecue fork leaves paired, uniformly spaced wounds; and a kitchen fork marks four evenly spaced punctures. Screwdrivers may leave wounds that distinguish a Phillips-head instrument from a standard slotted one. The wounds left by scissors depend on whether the two blades were separated at the time of use or not.
By looking at these wound characteristics, the ME can usually determine the type of instrument used and can easily distinguish a knife wound from one made with an ice pick or screwdriver. He might be able to assess the exact dimensions, shape, and style of the blade, but identifying the exact weapon is virtually impossible because the marks left are specific to a certain weapon. There are, however, two notable exceptions.
If the tip of the knife blade breaks off and remains in the wound, the crime lab might be able to match the broken edge to that of a suspect weapon. This would be strong individualizing evidence that this weapon made the wound. Or blood may provide the link. If the victim’s blood can be matched through DNA (see Chapter Ten) to blood found on the weapon, that would again be powerful evidence. Murderers often overlook small flecks of blood on the blade or handle or blood that has seeped into the groove between the blade and the hand guard. Wiping down or rinsing the knife will not always remove such traces.
The pattern of blood loss may be helpful in determining the sequence of the injuries and which wounds were potentially fatal. Post-mortem wounds do not bleed, so wounds associated with a large amount of blood loss must have occurred while the victim was alive. This is the general rule, anyway. But, if a person suffers multiple stab wounds and bleeds profusely, some wounds may be delivered after he has lost a great deal of blood and has slipped into shock. These wounds may show little or no bleeding. Alternatively, a wound to a large blood vessel in a dependent area may bleed significantly even after death. This is due to the force of gravity. Regardless, the ME uses the pattern of blood loss to help reconstruct the sequence of events surrounding the murder as best he can.
INCISED WOUNDS 
Incised wounds or cuts are caused when a sharp instrument is drawn across the skin. Unlike stab wounds, they have no characteristic width or depth, and thus reveal little of the nature of the weapon. These wounds are not usually fatal, but when they are, they are usually suicidal or homicidal. Accidental, suicidal, and homicidal incised wounds are usually in different areas of the body and show different cut patterns. Knowing these locations and patterns helps the ME reconstruct the death scene and determine the manner of death.
Accidental incised wounds typically involve the hands and are rarely fatal. To be lethal, an accidental cut would have to involve the neck or a major artery. Falling or flying glass fragments make up the majority of such serious wounds, though this can happen with falls onto sharp instruments or edges, or injuries suffered in a car accident, or with the use of power tools such as band, circular, or chain saws.
Suicidal wounds are usually found on the victim’s wrists. As with stab wounds, suicidal incised wounds are frequently accompanied by hesitation marks. Right-handed individuals typically cut their left wrist and left-handers their right.
Homicidal incised wounds are typically seen on the neck. If the assailant is behind the victim, the cut usually extends from high up on one side near the ear, sweeps downward across the front of the throat, and then back up on the opposite side (see Figure 7-3A). The cut tends to end up lower than it began. The path of this sweep is left to right in a right-handed assailant and the opposite for a left-handed one.
Figure 7-3A: Rear assault incised neck wound. The path of the blade is from high on one side of the neck, down and across the throat, and slightly upward again. Here the assailant was right handed, since the wound begins high on the left side of the neck. With a left-handed attacker, the path would be opposite. 
Figure 7-3B: Frontal assault incised neck wound. When an assailant faces his victim, the slashing wound is typically horizontal or slightly angled. 
If the attacker is facing his victim, the cut is usually shorter and horizontal or on a slight angle (see Figure 7-3B). Defensive wounds on the hands and arms are more common in frontal assaults.
CHOP WOUNDS 
Heavier, sharp-edged implements such as axes and meat cleavers produce chop wounds. The wounds tend to be deep and wedge-shaped and are often accompanied by fractures, grooves, and chips in underlying bones. Lethal chop wounds are usually accidental or homicidal and are very rarely suicidal. But it’s not uncommon for someone to accidentally injure himself while using an axe to chop wood. If the blow severs a major artery in the leg, death can follow from extensive blood loss unless medical help is quickly available.
BLUNT-FORCE TRAUMA  
Blunt-force trauma occurs whenever someone is struck with a blunt object, including fists, shoes, sticks, skillets, floors, stairs, bathtubs, steering wheels—any instrument that does not have a sharp or cutting edge. Blunt trauma can come from an assault, a fall, an automobile accident, or a number of other situations.
The injuries produced by such traumas vary based on the location, the force, and the number of the blows inflicted. The greater the force of the blow, the greater the resulting injury, while the greater the surface area struck by the blow, the less the injury. Thus, a board or boat oar will produce less injury than would a baseball bat swung with the same force. The greater surface area of the board spreads out and lessens the degree of injury.
The ME is often asked to determine what object caused a blunt-force injury. This is not always easy to do since similar wounds can be produced by very different objects. A hammer and certain brass statuettes could produce very similar wounds, or they may not. But the accurate determination of the type of weapon is critical since this might lead to identifying the assailant. For example, if the ME determines that a ball-peen hammer caused the victim’s skull fracture and the prime suspect has one in his possession, this could be useful information. The ME must also determine the age of the injury. If a victim’s cuts, bruises, and abrasions are two days old, they could not have occurred at the time of the assault in question but rather must have occurred prior to the current event. This may greatly affect the charges filed against the assailant.
As we saw with someone attacked with a knife, the victim of a blunttrauma assault also attempts to mount a defense by trying to block the blows with his hands and arms. For example, if pummeled with a baseball bat, the victim raises his arms to prevent the blows from striking his head. The blows impact against the palms and the ulnar side (little finger side) of his forearm. Abrasions, contusions, lacerations, and even broken bones can be defensive wounds.
Blunt-force injuries are of four types:
• abrasions 
• contusions 
• lacerations 
• fractures 
ABRASIONS 
Abrasions (scrapes) are injuries where the superficial layer of the skin is removed. Abrasions are classified as:
• scrape abrasions 
• impact abrasions 
• patterned abrasions  
Each of these comes from a different mechanism. Scrape abrasions occur when an object scrapes or brushes away the skin. Common examples are scratches from thorns or fingernails and slides across pavement, such as occurs when a vehicle strikes a pedestrian. Rope nooses and various types of strangulation ligatures can also cause neck scrape abrasions.
Impact abrasions occur when a blunt object strikes the skin, crushing it, and leaving behind a raw area. These injuries tend to be small and discreet.
Patterned abrasions are a special type of impact abrasion. Sometimes the object will leave behind its pattern or the pattern of any clothing between the object and the skin. A chain may leave abrasions that reveal the link pattern, or the grill pattern of a car in a hit-and-run may be seen on the victim. A neck abrasion left by the braid of a rope used in a murder by strangulation might be readily visible (see Chapter Eight). Or perhaps the assailant wore a ring with a large initial or unusual pattern, and when he struck the victim he left a distinctive patterned abrasion. If the victim is wearing clothing with a coarse weave, the impact may imprint the pattern of the weave on the victim’s skin. The ME can often use these autopsy findings to suggest the type of object that caused the injury. And if a suspect weapon or object is found, he might be able to match the object to the patterned abrasion on the victim.
Abrasion Healing 
The dating of abrasions is difficult; the estimation is based on the typical healing pattern of such injuries. Unfortunately, the process doesn’t always move at the usual pace. The ME visually inspects any wounds in both the living and the deceased, but in the deceased he can also examine the wounded tissues microscopically, which can better help him see how far along the abrasions are in the healing process.
The healing process can be divided into five stages:
• scab formation 
• cell regeneration 
• cell growth 
• remodeling 
• return to normal  
Scab formation begins almost immediately, though it is not visible for about six hours. The area appears dark red and, under the microscope, large numbers of specialized white blood cells called polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs or polys for short) are seen. This is followed by evidence of cell regeneration, which is marked by the reappearance of lost epithelial (skin) cells. This stage begins around one and half days after the injury, but is not clearly visible until about three days. Cell regeneration begins in surviving hair follicles at the edge of the injured area and spreads inward. Epithelial cell growth continues over the next five to ten days, and by about day twelve, the skin is remodeled. This remodeling is a thinning of the skin, which takes on a slightly pale appearance. Over the next week or two, the skin completes its repair and all remnants of the wound disappear. Rarely do abrasions leave permanent scars.
The ME can only guess the general age of an abrasion. His analysis of the injuries is based on these general healing stages, but the stages vary greatly from person to person and from different injuries in the same person. This still may be helpful in supporting or refuting suspect and witness statements.
Let’s say a suspect in an assault that occurred the previous night has scrape abrasions that appear to be from fingernails on his face and arms. He says the injuries are thorn scrapes that he got a week ago while hunting. If the examining physician finds that the scratches could not be more than twenty-four hours old, the suspect’s explanation doesn’t add up.
CONTUSIONS 
Contusions (bruises) occur after blunt trauma as a result of damage to the small blood vessels in the tissues. When damaged, these injured vessels leak blood, which imparts a blue-black color to the injured area. If the blood collects in a pocket beneath the skin (goose egg) it is called a hematoma. Heme means “blood” and toma means “tumor.” So, a hematoma is a tumor or mass of blood.
It is important to point out that the absence of a contusion does not mean that no trauma occurred. Sometimes, the trauma simply does not leave a bruise, or if it does, the bruise is deep and is not visible on the surface. The opposite is also true. The presence of bruises doesn’t necessarily mean that the person was intentionally injured. The reason is that some people, particularly children and the elderly, bruise more easily than others. The same is true for those with bleeding disorders, liver cirrhosis, or who take aspirin or other blood-thinning medications.
Some contusions reflect the object that caused them. As with abrasions, a chain, rope, or ring may leave behind a contusion that reveals its link pattern. A board may leave a broad bruise with straight parallel edges. A car grill pattern might be seen on the body of a car versus pedestrian collision and a handprint might be easily visible from slaps to the face or body on the injured party.
In blunt-force injuries, internal organs as well as skin can be contused. The liver, spleen, muscles, and other organs and tissues can be bruised in falls, automobile accidents, and some assaults. The liver and spleen are particularly prone to such injuries; these are easily identified at autopsy.
Contusion Healing 
As with abrasions, the dating of bruises is inexact at best and depends on the sequence of color changes that a contusion goes through as it is reabsorbed by the body. A bruise changes from blue-black to greenish-yellow to brownish-yellow before it finally fades. Why does this happen?
Once blood has left the vascular system and has leaked into the tissues, enzymes in the body break down the hemoglobin in the blood. It is these breakdown products that cause the changes in color. Then, scavenger cells, called macrophages, and the circulatory system remove these remnants. As this occurs, the contusion fades. This process follows a more or less predictable pattern and takes about two weeks to complete.
Contusions are initially blue-black in color and tend to darken and increase in size over the first forty-eight hours. The reason for this is that leakage of blood from the damaged vessels continues for that long, and thus enlarges and deepens the bruise. This is particularly true of contusions of the face and around the eyes, where the tissues are more lax and vascular (filled with blood vessels). Over the next four or five days, the contusion lightens somewhat, and by day seven it begins to change color. The color sequence is typically from dark blue to a lighter blue to a greenish-yellow to a brownish-yellow, after which it fades by about day fourteen.
The estimation of the age of bruises may be critical to the diagnosis of child and elder abuse. Abusers tend to repeat their abusive behavior again and again, so an abuse victim often shows multiple contusions of varying ages. Physicians must always be alert to the possibility of abuse when a child shows such an array of injuries. Similarly, when evaluating the accidental death of a child, the ME must diligently search for signs of repeated injury. Finding any may make him suspicious that the death was not truly accidental, but was the final insult in a series of abusive acts.
Besides assessing the age of contusions, the ME is often asked to determine when the injuries occurred. Was the victim battered before or after death?
Premortem, Perimortem, or Post-Mortem Trauma?
Premortem means before death, post-mortem after death, and perimortem around the time of death. Trauma administered during these time frames cause differing results, and the ME can use these changes as a general guideline for dating contusions.
Since a bruise takes several minutes to appear, if the victim suffers a contusing blow many minutes or hours before death, the resulting bruise will be fairly diffuse and widespread around the area of impact. However, if the blow is struck during the perimortem period, the bruise will be smaller and more clearly defined. The perimortem period may be defined as seconds or a very few minutes before or after death. Perimortem bruises are smaller because it takes time for the blood to seep into and spread through the tissues. If death interrupts this process, the bruise will be smaller and have more distinct edges.
It’s possible to bruise a corpse, but it is difficult. Since a contusion results from a leakage of blood from injured vessels, a bruise requires that blood be flowing into the injured vessel. At death, the heart stops, the blood ceases to circulate, and blood clotting occurs in a few minutes. Any injury to the vessel after death would not produce a bruise. The ME can use this to determine if a particular blow was struck before or after death—most of the time, anyway. But if a blow to a corpse is delivered with sufficient force, vessels may be damaged and any blood stagnated within them might leak into the area of impact. Again, with no blood flow, this bruise would be smaller than one that formed before death. Unfortunately, the ME is not always able to determine if the blow was premortem or post-mortem.
Sometimes a body suspected of having suffered blunt-force trauma shows no evidence of bruising on the surface. This may be the case if the bruising has occurred deeply within the tissues and muscles and if the victim did not live long enough for the bruising to seep up to the surface where it would be visible. In this situation, during the autopsy, the ME makes a series of deep cuts into the muscles and down to the bones along the back, arms, and legs in a search for deep bruising. He also looks for contusions of the internal organs such as the liver, spleen, heart, and lungs. If he finds contusions or hematomas in these areas, he then knows that the victim had indeed suffered blunt-force trauma.
Examining the contusions carefully, the ME must determine if they occurred pre-, peri-, or post-mortem, and if any of the contusing blows were potentially lethal. As with gunshot and stab wounds, these determinations can directly impact the cause and time of death, as well as substantiate or refute a suspect’s account of events.
LACERATIONS 
Lacerations (tears or rips) from blunt trauma occur when the skin is crushed or sheared by the blow. Basically the skin is torn or ripped by the impact. These are more common in areas where the skin lies close to the bone, such as the scalp. Lacerations may occur not only to the skin but also to internal organs. An avulsion is a severe laceration where a section of the skin is actually torn away from the underlying tissues or bone. This most often occurs when the blow strikes the skin at an oblique or tangential angle.
Sometimes the nature of the laceration and any associated contusions gives the ME a clue as to the type of instrument that caused the injury. A board or a baseball bat would leave a broader bruise and a larger area of skin disruption than would a thinner metal rod or a thicker car bumper.
FRACTURES 
Fractures are breaks in the bones. A simple fracture is a single break, a comminuted fracture is where the bone breaks in two or more places, and a compound fracture is one in which the bone protrudes through the skin. These may result from either direct or indirect trauma.
Fractures From Direct Trauma 
When an object directly strikes a bone, it can cause a single transverse fracture or a crush fracture, which tends to be comminuted (see Figure 7-4). A transverse fracture is one that is perpendicular to the long axis of the bone, and a crush fracture is one where the bone is broken into pieces, like cracking or crushing ice. A crush fracture often produces a compression wedge, which may indicate the direction of the blow, with the point of the wedge pointing in the direction of the force. Knowing the direction of the compression wedge helps the ME reconstruct the blow and perhaps the sequence of multiple injuries. In automobile versus pedestrian accidents, this type of fracture is often termed a “bumper fracture” since it results from the impact of the vehicle’s bumper against the victim’s legs.
Fractures From Indirect Trauma 
Indirect fractures are not due to a direct blow but occur when some other force is applied to the bone with sufficient force to cause it to break. Traumatic indirect fractures can be divided into four basic types (see Figure 7-5):
• angulation 
• rotational 
• compression 
• combination of these types  
Figure 7-4: Direct fractures. Direct fractures can be either a simple transverse break or a crush fracture. The latter often produces a compression wedge that indicates the direction of the applied force. 
Figure 7-5: Indirect fractures. Indirect trauma may result in fractures that are angulation (A), rotational (B), compression (C), or a combination of these types. 
Angulation fractures (see Figure 7-6A) occur when a bone is bent to the point of breaking. These tend to be simple transverse breaks.
Rotational fractures (see Figure 7-6B) follow the twisting of a bone as when an arm or leg is violently rotated. These tend to be spiral fractures, which literally spiral down the long axis of the bone. The path of the spiral indicates the direction of the twisting force. These types of fractures are frequently seen in sports injuries, as well as in abused children.
Compression fractures (see Figure 7-6C) result when a force is applied along the long axis of the bone. This drives the bone into its end and results in T- or Y-shaped break. This is common in automobile accidents where the knee is driven into the dashboard or when someone falling from a sufficient height lands on his feet.
Sometimes a bone is subjected to many types of forces and the resulting fractures can be any combination of these three. Multiple fracture types are often seen in automobile accidents and falls from high places.
Assessing the age of fractures is easier than aging abrasions and contusions. Initially there is bleeding into the fracture site, followed by the accumulation of various types of blood cells. By the end of the first week osteoblasts—bone-forming cells—appear. By week two or three, a callus forms. This is a fibrous capsule-like structure that surrounds the area of fracture. Bone formation and the closing of the fracture within the callus takes four to six weeks, and complete healing may take five months. This sequence of events varies with age and from person to person. Healing is faster in the young and slower in the old.
Aging fractures is extremely important in the evaluation of individuals who have suffered multiple injuries over a period of time, such as in cases of child or elder abuse. In these situations, X-rays might show fractures that are years old, others that are weeks old, and still others that are fresh, indicating the ongoing nature of the abuse. As with bruises, whenever a physician sees a child or elderly person with fractures of varying ages, the likelihood of repeated abuse must be considered.
TRAUMA TO INTERNAL ORGANS 
The ME often evaluates internal injuries resulting from blunt force trauma, as well. This is a broad and complex subject, and is far beyond the scope of this book, but a few general statements are in order. In examining internal trauma, the ME attempts to determine the cause and mechanism of the injuries, estimate the sequence of the injuries, and determine the manner of death. When there are multiple injuries, he assesses which injury, if any, was the proximate cause of death. For example, did death come from the blow that ruptured the spleen or from the one that contused the heart and lungs? This determination can implicate or exonerate a suspect, confirm or repudiate suspect or witness statements, and assign blame for the death in any situation where there were multiple attackers.
BLUNT TRAUMA AND HEAD INJURIES 
Head trauma is always dangerous. Even though most blows to the head don’t result in death, a lot of nasty and deadly injuries can result. In fact, the head is the single most dangerous location for blunt-force trauma. Head and brain injuries and skull fractures are most often accidental, usually from falls or motor vehicle accidents, but they can also be from assaults or from suicide attempts where the individual jumps from an elevation or purposefully crashes his car.
When faced with a death in which head trauma is present, the ME must evaluate how the injury occurred. This includes a determination of what instrument caused the trauma and whether the manner of the injury was accidental, suicidal, or homicidal.
Blunt head trauma may result in anything from a simple bump on the head (contusion) to loss of consciousness (concussion) to death. To cause death, bleeding would most likely have to occur. Bleeding anywhere inside the cranium (skull) is called intracranial bleeding. It may occur with the rupture of an artery, a vein, or multiple small capillaries, any one of which can follow trauma.
Intracranial Bleeds 
Several different membranes (thin sheets of tissue) cover the brain. The most important is the dura mater, which separates the brain from the skull. The space between the dura mater and the skull is called the epidural space, while the space between the dura mater and the brain is the subdural space. Intracranial bleeds are of three basic types (see Figure 7-6):
INTRACEREBRAL BLEEDS: bleeding within the brain tissue itself 
EPIDURAL BLEEDS: bleeding between the dura mater and the skull 
SUBDURAL BLEEDS: bleeding between the dura mater and the brain 
Figure 7-6: Intracranial bleeds. Any bleeding within the skull is called intracranial bleeding. Subcategories include intracerebral bleeds (within the brain), subdural bleeds (between the brain and the dura mater), and epidural bleeds (between the dura mater and the skull). All are potentially deadly.
Intracerebral bleeds typically result from strokes, ruptured aneurysms (swelling in the arteries that are prone to rupture and death), and blunt or penetrating head trauma. Both epidural and subdural bleeds occur in the space between the brain and the skull. Epidural bleeds typically follow skull fractures, which result in injury to or laceration of the epidural arteries that course over the surface of the brain. Subdural bleeds can occur with ruptured aneurysms or with trauma, where the bleeding is usually due to torn veins in the subdural space. They may occur with or without fracture of the skull. All these bleeds are potentially lethal.
Figure 7-7: Brain stem herniation. Bleeding within the rigid skull can elevate the pressure and force the brain downward into the foramen magnum. This deadly sequence of events is called herniation of the brainstem  
The skull is a rigid capsule. It’s designed that way to protect the brain. But in traumatic injuries, this rigidity is the proverbial double-edged sword, since when bleeding occurs within the skull or within the brain itself, the bony skull cannot expand. This causes the pressure inside the skull to rise rapidly, effectively squeezing the brain. The only outlet is the hole (called the foramen magnum) at the base of the skull where the spinal cord exits (see Figure 7-7). It lies near the back juncture of the skull and the neck. The mounting pressure first shuts down all brain function and ultimately pushes brain material into the opening and down along the spinal cord. We call this herniation of the brainstem. Not only is consciousness lost, but the part of the brainstem that controls breathing shuts down, respiration stops, and death follows. This process can occur over minutes, hours, or days.
At autopsy, the ME can easily determine that a blow to the head occurred and can locate bleeding into and around the brain. He might then conclude that the cause of death was blunt-force injury to the brain with bleeding. The manner of death depends on whether the blow was accidental or intentional.
Skull Fractures 
Significant brain injury can occur with or without a fracture of the skull. Also, a fractured skull may or may not be associated with injury to the brain. Skull fractures may be simple linear, circular, stellate, or depressed (see Figure 7-8).
Simple linear fractures occur with low-impact injuries such as falls or a blow to the head. Circular fractures require more force and may result from a blow with a pipe, hammer, or similar object. Depending on the angle and the force of the blow, a circular fracture might be a complete or incomplete circle. With an even more powerful blow, the fracture may take on a stellate or star-like shape. This results when the force of the blow bends the skull inward, causing it to fracture along multiple lines of stress.
Figure 7-8: Skull fracture types. Skull fractures may be simple linear, circular, stellate, or depressed. The type of fracture seen reflects the weapon or injury that caused it. 
A depressed skull fracture is one in which a section of the skull is pushed inward against the brain. This requires a blow of considerable force, enough so that the skull is fractured through its entire depth. A hammer can produce such a fracture by forcing a circular segment of the skull inward.
The ME determines the nature of the fracture and then attempts to estimate what instrument likely caused it. This may help him establish the manner of death. Let’s say a man is found dead, sprawled at the bottom of some stairs, and his wife says he fell. At autopsy the ME finds a depressed skull fracture that suggests that the fatal blow came from a hammer and not from the stairs or the floor. If a hammer is found at the scene he might be able to determine that the shape and size of the hammer’s head matches the depressed portion of the skull exactly. He would then likely state that the manner of death was homicidal and not accidental.
Coup and Contrecoup Brain Injuries 
Coup and contrecoup injuries constitute special types of brain injuries that occur in situations characterized by rapid acceleration or deceleration. This means that the organ either collides with a stationary or slower-moving structure or a faster-moving structure collides with a stationary or slower-moving organ. Picture a car involved in a rear-end collision. Damage results because the two cars are moving at different speeds. A similar situation occurs with head injuries if the brain and the skull are moving at different speeds. The brain sits within the skull and is surrounded by several layers of membranes and fluid (cerebrospinal fluid). Like an egg yolk within the shell, the brain is suspended to some degree and can move a little.
When someone is struck in the head or when a head is moving and strikes an object, two types of lesions (injuries) may occur. The first is called a coup lesion and is at the site of the impact. The second type of injury, a contrecoup lesion, often called an acceleration-deceleration injury, involves the side of the brain opposite the blow. Contrecoup lesions can occur with or without a fracture of the skull. The mechanism by which this happens is complicated, but essentially the blow to the skull imparts some motion to the brain, which then collides with the opposite side of the skull, causing injury to that area.
When a blow is applied to one side of the head, the brain absorbs some of the blow’s energy and may be injured. This is a coup injury. The blow also causes the brain to move, and it might bounce off the other side of the skull. This is a contrecoup injury and can be in the form of a contusion, tear, or bleeding of the brain and is often worse than that of the coup injury. 
When the head is moving and strikes an object, such as in an auto accident, the brain is moving as well. A coup injury might occur at the site of impact, such as the forehead striking the dashboard (see Figure 7-9). The brain then bounces backwards and strikes the back of the skull, causing a contrecoup injury. .
Figure 7-9: Coup and contrecoup injuries. When the head strikes the dashboard the brain in the area of impact is injured (coup). The brain might then bounce backwards and strike the back of the skull (contrecoup). 
This type of injury is also seen in shaken baby syndrome. The violent back and forth movement of the infant’s head repeatedly bangs the brain against the skull and can lead to severe brain damage and death.
At autopsy, the ME might find a contusion at the site of the traumatic blow as well as of the brain beneath that area (coup injury). He might also find contusions, lacerations, and bleeding of the brain on the side opposite the blow. This would be a contrecoup injury. Sometimes the coup injury is not evident and the ME only finds evidence for the contrecoup damage. In these situations, the contrecoup injury might be mistaken for a direct injury, which could lead the ME to draw the wrong conclusion as to how the injury occurred. He might say the victim was struck from behind when in fact the blow came from the front. This could confuse the reconstruction of the crime scene (see Chapter Two).
ELECTRICAL INJURIES  
Electrical current can be considered either low or high voltage. Low-voltage currents, found in residential electrical systems, are less than 600 to 1,000 volts. High-voltage currents, most often found in industrial situations, are in the range of 1,000 to 8,000 volts. Virtually all deaths from electrical current are accidental since it is rarely used for suicide or homicide.
Most people know not to touch a live wire or stick anything into an electrical outlet, yet every year thousands of people suffer shocks from just such actions. And some of these are deadly.
When electricity enters the body, it flows from the point of entry to the point of grounding by following the shortest path. Electricity can kill by several different mechanisms. Whether a particular shock is deadly depends on its voltage and the duration of contact. A low-voltage current can take several minutes to do harm while a high-voltage one can kill instantly.
LOW-VOLTAGE SHOCKS 
Residential alternating current (AC) is low voltage and causes only minor burns if the exposure is brief. With longer exposures, severe burns may result and internal organs such as the liver and bone marrow may be severely and irreparably damaged, which may cause death. But the greatest danger of a low-voltage shock is its effect on the heart.
The normal heartbeat is due to a rhythmic pulse of electrical current that originates in the heart’s internal pacemaker and flows through the heart muscle in a well-organized pattern. A low-voltage AC shock can interfere with this rhythmic pulse and lead to deadly cardiac arrhythmias (changes in heart rhythm) such as ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation. Death is typically instantaneous when this occurs.
HIGH-VOLTAGE SHOCKS 
High-voltage electrocutions occur in industrial settings and from the high-tension lines that carry currents across the country and into neighborhoods. Local suburban and urban lines typically carry 7,000 to 8,000 volts, while the transcontinental lines carry 100,000 or more volts. Contact with these high-tension lines usually occurs when they fall to the ground in storms or in vehicle accidents. Direct contact with these high-voltage cables is not necessary since the current can arc or “jump” from the line to a person standing nearby. Also, any tall metallic object, such as a ladder, a crane arm, a cherry picker, or TV cameras, can carry the current to the victim.
High-voltage AC shocks usually result in severe internal and external burning with even very brief exposures. But they are less likely to cause dangerous changes in the heart’s rhythm. The reason is that higher voltage currents are defibrillatory rather than fibrillatory. Defibrillatory means that they convert an abnormal rhythm back to a normal rhythm rather than the other way around. In a cardiac arrest, the external shock that physicians give to the patient is higher voltage. It is intended to restore a normal rhythm where a deadly, abnormal rhythm exists. However, high-voltage shocks can paralyze the respiratory center in the brain and death can follow from asphyxia.
At autopsy, the ME typically finds several signs of electrical injury. In some low- and all high-voltage deaths, charred skin is seen at the point of contact, the point of grounding, or both. For example, if the victim grabbed an electrical cable with his right hand, the current might flow through his body and exit into the ground through his left foot. Here the ME would likely see burning or charring of the right hand and left foot. Sometimes in low-voltage electrocutions there is no charring but instead redness and blistering at the contact point. In the case of a high-voltage arc, there might be multiple small areas of burning, which represent the contact points of the arcing electricity.
One interesting phenomenon of electrocution deaths is the appearance of localized rigor mortis. The spasm of rigor mortis results when the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in the muscles falls low after death (see Chapter Five: Time of Death, “Rigor Mortis”). With electrocution, the muscular spasm caused by the electrical current may consume the ATP and cause a more sudden onset of rigor in the affected area. In the above example, the victim’s right arm and left leg could show signs of rigor long before the rest of the body.
In the rare cases where electrocution is used as a tool for homicide, it usually involves the tossing of an electrical device into a tub where someone is sitting in water. In this situation, there are no burns to the body, and if the device is removed before the body is found, the ME may not be able to determine the cause of death. This is less common than in the past since all such devices are required to have ground-fault circuit interrupters (GFCIs), which break the electrical circuit as soon as a spike in the current or resistance is detected.
LIGHTNING 
Lightning never strikes twice—because once is usually enough to do in the victim. Of course, lightning can strike twice, such as at lightning rods, and many people do survive being hit by lightning. There are some cases of individuals surviving multiple strikes. Needless to say, all deaths from lightning are accidental.
Lightning strikes come in four varieties:
DIRECT STRIKE: The lightning hits the victim directly. This is the most serious type and more likely if the victim is holding a metal object such as a golf club or umbrella.
FLASHOVER: The lightning travels over the outside of the body. This is more likely if the victim is wearing wet clothing or is covered with sweat.
SIDE FLASH: The current splashes from a nearby building, tree, or other person and then spreads to the victim.
STRIDE POTENTIAL: The lightning strikes the ground near the victim with one foot being closer to the strike than the other. This sets up a potential electrical difference between the legs, which is called a stride potential. Here the current enters through one leg, spreads through the body, and exits via the other leg.
Lightning, which is a direct current (DC), is extremely high voltage in the range of 3 million to 200 million volts. Fortunately, the current is very brief, averaging from 1 to 100 milliseconds (thousandths of a second). This is why some people do survive lightning strikes.
The injuries that result are primarily due to the body’s conversion of the electrical energy to heat. This heat can burn and char the skin, scorch the clothing, fry various internal organs, and even fuse or melt metal objects in the victim’s pockets, buttons on his shirt, belt buckles, and the fillings in his teeth. All the organs and tissues of the body are susceptible to injury. Survivors often suffer significant damage to the heart, liver, kidneys, bone marrow, brain, spinal cord, and muscles.
Figure 7-10: Lichtenberg figures. This arboresque pattern of skin discoloration is seen only in lightning strikes. 
One interesting, though rare, sign of lightning strikes are Lichtenberg Figures (see Figure 7-10) on the body. Lichtenberg Figures are branching electric discharges first described in 1777 by German physicist Georg Christoph Lichtenberg (1742–1799). They appear as a painless, red fernlike or arboresque pattern over the back, shoulders, buttocks, or legs. It appears quickly and tends to fade over twelve to forty-eight hours, leaving behind no scars or discolorations. Their cause is unclear, but when they are seen, they are pathognomonic (absolutely indicative) of lightning strikes, which aids the ME in determining the cause of death.
BITE WOUNDS  
Bite injuries occur in cases of murder, rape, torture, assault, and child or spousal abuse. They also might be used for self-defense. In fact, bite wounds are characterized as either offensive or defensive.
Offensive bite wounds are inflicted on the victim by the perpetrator. They tend to be well defined and can be single or multiple. Defensive bite wounds are inflicted by the victim on the attacker as an attempt to ward off the assault. These tend to be more diffuse and can result in tearing and ripping of the skin.
Using bite mark patterns to solve crimes is not new, as witnessed by the famous Gordon Hay Case.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: GORDON HAY’S ODD TEETH 
On August 7, 1967, the body of missing fifteen-year-old Linda Peacock of Biggar, Scotland, was found in a cemetery. She had been beaten and then strangled with a rope. There was no evidence of rape, but a bruise near her right breast turned out to be a bite mark, which revealed that one of the killer’s teeth was unusually jagged.
The town of Biggar had only two thousand residents and the police interviewed virtually all of them, as well as members of nearby communities. The investigation led the police to a local low-security detention center for juvenile offenders. Twenty-nine residents of the center were asked to give dental impressions and these were matched against the wound found on the girl. This narrowed the suspect list to one person—Gordon Hay.
Hay had a rare disorder called hypocalcination, which causes pits and craters in the teeth. The defects in Hay’s teeth were matched to the pattern of the bruises on the girl’s corpse and he was convicted of the murder.
Bite mark evidence was first allowed into a United States courtroom in Texas in 1954 in Doyle v. Texas. Since then many cases have revolved around bite patterns on victims or in food materials.
The biting of victims seems to be particularly favored by some serial killers, such as Ted Bundy. In fact, it was bite marks that ultimately led to his conviction. It’s disturbing that people like Bundy exist or that we must even discuss the art of bite mark analysis. But bite mark comparison is an important forensic tool. It involves not only the marks left on a human victim but also bite patterns left on food.
FORENSIC CASE FILES: TED BUNDY 
Between 1969 and 1975, a series of brutal sexual homicides swept through the Pacific Northwest, Utah, and Colorado. The female victims each possessed dark hair, parted down the middle. The killer used various ruses to entrap his victims, often wearing a fake cast or feigning some injury to elicit the victim’s help with some task. Once the unsuspecting woman stepped into his tiny Volkswagen Beetle, the killer would overpower her and take her to some remote area where he would torture, rape, and murder her.
As police in various jurisdictions worked the cases, one name kept cropping up: Theodore Bundy. On November 8, 1974, eighteen-year-old Carol DaRonch found herself inside Bundy’s VW, but when he attempted to handcuff her, she fought him off and escaped. Nearly a year later, on August 16, 1975, police stopped a VW driver for suspicious behavior. They found handcuffs and a crowbar in the car and identified the driver as Ted Bundy. Carol DaRonch identified him, and he was convicted of kidnapping and given fifteen years in prison.
In June 1977, Bundy was extradited to Colorado to face a murder charge, but he escaped, only to be recaptured eight days later. On December 30, he escaped again and this time made his way to Florida.
On the night on January 15, 1978, Bundy entered the Chi Omega sorority house on the campus of Florida State University in Tallahassee where he assaulted and raped four co-eds, killing Lisa Levy and Margaret Bowman. Less than two hours later another student was attacked. She survived.
One month later, police arrested Chris Hagen for driving a stolen vehicle and quickly discovered that Chris was actually Ted Bundy, who was wanted for murder in several states. He would first be tried in Florida for the Tallahassee murders.
Unfortunately for prosecutors, Bundy had left little evidence at the Chi Omega house. No fingerprints, blood, or semen, and neither of the two surviving victims could identify him as the attacker. The single piece of evidence the police had was a bite mark on the buttocks of Lisa Levy. Bundy refused to give an impression of his teeth, but a court order soon forced him to comply. Bundy’s teeth were misaligned and chipped, and they matched perfectly the bite mark bruises found on Lisa Levy. On July 23, 1980, Bundy was convicted and finally visited Florida’s electric chair on January 24, 1989.
If a perpetrator bites into an apple or a piece of cheese, or uses his teeth to tear a piece of tape, he might leave a valuable clue at the crime scene. The ME might be able to use these to match the dental pattern of any suspect.
Bite marks on human flesh are similar, except that flesh, unlike an apple, is elastic and recoils somewhat, so that the details are less clear. Still, a match between the punctures and bruises left on the skin and the dental pattern of a suspect can often be made. If, as in Ted Bundy’s case, the individual’s teeth are damaged, chipped, or in an unusual pattern, an individualizing match can sometimes result.
Not all bite injuries occur to harm, control, or torture the victim. For some serial killers, post-mortem biting is part of their fantasy, their signature (see Chapter Nineteen: Criminal Psychology, “MO vs. Signature”). As with blunt-force contusions, the ME can often distinguish among bite marks made before death (antemortem), around the time of death (perimortem), and those that are inflicted after death (post-mortem). The key to this determination is the degree of bruising.
As discussed earlier, contusions (bruises) are due to bleeding within damaged tissues and occur only in the living. A human bite might puncture the skin or simply contuse it and often both types of injuries are present. Puncture wounds can occur whether the victim is alive or not, but bruising requires that the bite be delivered ante-mortem.
Bites that are inflicted many minutes before death tend to leave behind a diffuse bruising pattern. This happens because the blood has sufficient time to spread away from the actual injury site. Perimortem bite marks possess a more distinct or well-defined bruise pattern. Since death occurs shortly after the bite, the bleeding has less time to spread, resulting in this more concentrated pattern. Post-mortem bites have no bruising. They might show punctures or indentations, but since there is no blood flow, bruising simply doesn’t occur.
Once a bite mark is located on a victim, it is carefully photographed, using both black-and-white and color film. Swabs are obtained for saliva so that amylase testing (Chapter Nine), ABO blood typing (Chapter Nine), and DNA analysis (Chapter Ten) can be done. Additional swabs are taken and placed into a culture tube designed to grow any anaerobic bacteria, which are common inhabitants of the mouth. Since each individual grows slightly different combinations of bacteria in his oral cavities, comparing the types of bacteria found in the bite wound with those found in the suspect’s mouth might provide another link between him and the victim. This is not strong evidence, but it is helpful in some cases.
Once a suspect is identified, a mold of his teeth can be made and from these a model can be created. This casting can then be compared with the bite marks on the victim. The lack of a match can exclude the suspect. If a match is made, it is suggestive, but confirmation that the suspect is the perpetrator requires more definitive testing such as DNA matching, which can often be done using saliva left in the bite wound.
RAPE INVESTIGATION  
Rape is rarely about sex, but is rather about violence, control, and humiliation. Rape is a legal term and not a medical diagnosis. The physician can determine if penetration has likely occurred, if trauma is present, and if semen is found in or on the victim, but the courts must decide whether the sexual encounter was indeed a rape. In other words, the court must decide the “intent” of both parties. In order for rape to be charged, three things must have occurred: actual penetration, the use of force, and the lack of consent.
Penetration does not need to be complete, since only slight penetration is needed to meet the definition of rape. Force may be applied through violence, the threat of violence, or coercion. All too often, rape is accompanied by homicide, either as part of the violent act or following it to prevent the victim from identifying the assailant. Rape is often part of the act of homicide by a serial killer, particularly the sexually sadistic types. In this case, the rape is almost always part of the killer’s fantasy or his need to humiliate the victim.
ASSAULT SURVIVORS 
In a living rape victim, it is critical that a complete rape exam be done as soon after the act as possible. Unfortunately, because the act is so humiliating for the victim, she will often wait days, if not months or years, before reporting it. At other times, the victim will shower or bathe before going to authorities or to a hospital. On the surface this may seem to be odd behavior for an assault victim, but rape is not like a punch in the face. It carries with it an array of emotions and social baggage that no other crime does. Often the victim feels ashamed, even guilty, and wants to avoid the inappropriate, but real, feeling of social stigmatization. Remnants of Puritanical thinking and a court system that all too often puts the victim “on trial” play a role in these feelings.
Ideally, a medical doctor experienced in rape examinations examines the victim. If possible, a law enforcement officer should be present so that the chain of evidence can be maintained. The examination consists of a history, complete physical exam, photographs if indicated, and evidence collection. Of course, the treatment of any serious or life-threatening injuries to the victim takes precedence over evidence collection.
The physician examines the victim’s entire body, including the genitalia, for evidence of trauma such as bruises, abrasions, or lacerations. He carefully notes and photographs each. Note that the absence of signs of trauma or violence in no way negates or diminishes the claim that a rape has occurred. Any bite marks are photographed and swabbed for saliva, which may yield DNA evidence. Any stains are likewise swabbed since they could represent saliva or semen. As guided by the history the victim gives as to what transpired during the assault, the examining physician obtains vaginal, anal, and oral swabs for DNA-containing materials. The victim’s pubic hair is combed for foreign hairs and fibers. Lastly, the victim’s clothing is examined for stains; if any are found, samples are taken and the clothing is packaged and taken to the crime lab for evaluation. All evidence collected is turned over to law enforcement for transport to the crime lab for study.
Once the examination is completed, the victim’s injures are treated and she is given medications to prevent pregnancy and to treat any possible venereal diseases. The philosophy is to treat these as soon as possible, not wait and see if they arise. HIV testing is obtained and repeated over the next several months. A rape counselor usually becomes involved immediately to help the victim with the psychological fallout from the assault.
At the crime lab, a search for spermatozoa in the vaginal, oral, or anal samples is undertaken. In living victims, motile (moving) sperm may be seen up to twelve hours after intercourse and rarely up to twenty-four hours. Non-motile sperm may persist for two or three days. As sperm die off, they initially lose their tails, leaving behind only sperm heads. These may be seen up to seven days after intercourse. So if the victim states that she last had consensual intercourse three days earlier, the finding of non-motile sperm or sperm heads is of little help, but any motile sperm could not have come from that episode and must be related to the rape.
Even if no sperm are found, intercourse cannot be ruled out. The assailant may have used a condom, had a previous vasectomy, have failed to ejaculate, or be azoospermic—a condition in which no sperm are produced.
FATAL ASSAULTS 
In rape-homicides, many of the same examinations are taken except that a history of the events is typically absent and the ME rather than a physician performs the examination. As with any homicide, it is best if the ME sees the body at the crime scene, but for practical reasons this is not always possible (see Chapter Two). At the scene, the coroner’s technicians are charged with transporting the body and protecting the evidence. Paper bags are secured over the victim’s hands and the body is placed in a clean body bag or wrapped in clean sheets for transport. This prevents the loss of trace evidence and lessens the likelihood that the corpse will pick up any trace materials during transport.
At the lab, the ME initially examines the victim while clothed. He will look for trace evidence and stains and attempt to match any defects in the clothing with injuries to the victim. Only then are the clothes removed and sent to the crime lab for further processing. The ME then turns his attention to the body.
The body is searched for foreign hair, fibers, or other trace evidence. Stains are examined and swabbed. After the protective bags have been removed, the ME carefully examines the hands and collects nail clippings and scrapings. Often the assailant’s hair, blood, or skin tissues are found clutched in the victim’s hand, or beneath her fingernails. All injuries, including those to the genitalia, are examined and photographed. A diligent search for evidence of penetration follows, and vaginal, anal, and oral swabs are obtained.
Even if no overt genital trauma is found, the ME looks for signs that sexual intercourse took place. Vaginal fluids are examined for semen; this is done both chemically and microscopically (see Chapter Nine: Serology, “Other Body Fluids.”). Tests for acid phosphatase, an enzyme found in abundant quantities in semen, and p30, a semen-specific glycoprotein, are done. Acid phosphatase may be present up to seventy-two hours after intercourse. A problem arises when the victim has had consensual sex during the two or three days before the assault. There is no method for determining if elevated levels of acid phosphatase are remnants of this consensual act or of the rape itself.
As in the living victim, sperm are searched for in the vaginal, anal, and oral samples taken at autopsy. Sperm survive longer in a corpse than in a living victim because, in a living woman, the vagina produces certain chemicals that destroy sperm, while in a corpse, sperm are destroyed only through decomposition, which requires many days. Sperm can sometimes be found for up to two weeks in a corpse. 
