---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0022_split_001.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["death", "execution", "spencer", "state", "prison", "prisoner", "witness", "time", "first", "warden", "inmate", "injection", "lethal", "row", "officer", "chamber", "day", "electric", "body", "florida", "cell", "condemned", "two", "chair", "used"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0022split001html

---


15
THE DEATH PENALTYAn innocent man is going to be murdered tonight. When my innocence is proven, I hope Americans will realize the injustice of the death penalty as all other civilized countries have.— ROGER KEITH COLEMAN, EXECUTED IN 1992 FOR THE BRUTAL RAPE AND MURDER OF HIS SISTER-IN-LAW, WANDA FAYE MCCOYThe United States has a long history of putting people to death for committing crimes. In the year 2006 alone, fifty-three men (no women) were executed in prison death chambers. Fifty-two of those men met their demise through lethal injection. The fifty-third man was killed via electrocution.According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, the majority of those executions (twenty-four) occurred in Texas. The remaining executions were divided among thirteen other states: five in Ohio; four each in North Carolina, Florida, Oklahoma, and Virginia; and one each in South Carolina, Indiana, Alabama, Tennessee, Mississippi, California, Nevada, and Montana.At the end of 2005, there were 3,254 men and women on death row. Their ages ranged from twenty to ninety. Fifty-two of those prisoners were women.State of Ohio Death Warrant.Upon imposing a death sentence, judges sign an official death warrant ordering the prison's warden to put the prisoner to death. The warrant is read to the inmate by the prison warden just prior to the inmate's execution. At the completion of the execution, the warden signs the warrant confirming the death of the inmate and then delivers the original warrant to the clerk of the court. She then files the death warrant as part of the inmate's permanent record.DEATH ROWDeath row inmates spend their days alone in a 6′ × 9′ cell, with the exception of a one-hour recreation period each day and a few minutes to take a shower every other day. Their meals are prepared by prisoners in the institution's kitchen and are delivered to them three times each day.Corrections officals must sign the return portion of the death warrant upon receipt of the condemned prisoner.Security is much tighter on death row than in all other areas of the prison. Corrections officers must count the death row inmates at least once an hour to ensure that each of them is present and accounted for.Prisoners on death row are allowed to receive mail, magazines, books, and newspapers. Some prisons allow death row inmates the luxury of having a small portable TV set inside their cells.Even though death row prisoners are segregated from other prisoners, they're normally required to wear clothing that's easily distinguishable from all other inmates.As a prisoner's execution date draws near (approximately two weeks prior to the execution date), he's moved to a cell that's closer to the death chamber, called a death watch cell. Some states, such as Virginia, house their death row prisoners in a different facility altogether than the prison where the execution chamber is located.A death watch cell is normally larger than the cells on death row (the state of Florida's death watch cells are 12′ × 7′ × 8½′). Corrections death watch cells at all times to prevent officers must watch prisoners in the death watch cells at all times to prevent suicide attempts. By law, they must be kept alive so they can be officially executed. They must also record each and every move the inmates make during their time on death watch.On the day of his execution, the condemned prisoner is allowed to request a special meal. His last meal may be prepared in the prison's kitchen or purchased from an outside vendor. Many condemned prisoners choose to have a meal brought in from the outside.Inmate Arthur Dennis Rutherford, who was executed in Florida on October 18, 2006, enjoyed a last meal of fried catfish, fried green tomatoes, fried eggplant, hush puppies, and sweet tea. Rutherford had been served the same meal in January 2006, just prior to being awarded a stay of execution. His request for a second stay was denied in October.Prisoners normally spend many years waiting for their execution dates to arrive. In most states, condemned prisoners are afforded every opportunity and every possible appeal to show why they shouldn't be put to death. As a result of the many opportunities for appeal and legal maneuvering, some prisoners have remained on death row for nearly thirty years. The average time spent on death row in Florida is thirteen years.The costs to try a death penalty case can exceed two million dollars. The costs to try that same inmate without the death penalty would probably be less than $200,000.Interestingly, some prisoners say they'd rather die than spend their entire lives in prison. They indicate that sitting alone in a 6′ × 9′ cell every day, wishing and dreaming of being outside, is torture. They compare the years of incarceration to sitting in a tiny closet day in and day out, without the opportunity to eat when you want or take a daily shower. There's no window to see outside, no refrigerator for a snack, and no television to pass the time. The only way to make the day go by is to sit and think and contemplate their reasons for being in prison, with no hope of ever getting out.WITNESSES TO AN EXECUTIONMost state laws require that a certain number of people be present as witnesses to executions. Normally, the law calls for at least four people from the general population to serve as witnesses. These witnesses are considered official witnesses of record. Some prisons maintain a list of potential witnesses who have requested to volunteer their services, if and when they're needed.The law also allows for the presence of lawyers, prison staff, police officers, and members of the victim's family. Members of the condemned man's family may also request to be present. Most states have a limit on the total number of witnesses who may be present to observe an execution. North Carolina law restricts that number to sixteen. IN THE LINE OF DUTY A WITNESS TO DEATHVirginia, April 27, 1994. It was just before 11:00 P.M. when I watched convicted serial killer Timothy Spencer walk into the execution chamber at Greensville Correctional Center in Jarratt, Virginia. It was another execution for me, but this time I wasn't on the prison grounds to provide security as a police officer — I was inside the execution building as a witness. I'd been called on, as a police officer, by prison officials to watch Spencer die for killing one of the four women he'd brutally raped and murdered.DNA testing on evidence samples from Spencer's cases was conducted in Virginia's state forensic laboratory and at two other testing facilities — Cellmark Diagnostics and Lifecodes, Inc. Test results from all three laboratories were conclusive — Spencer was indeed the killer. Spencer (nicknamed the Southside Strangler by the media) was the first person in the United States to be sentenced to death based on DNA evidence.The case drew so much attention that media all across the country reported the execution. On the night of Spencer's execution, news teams lined the narrow road leading to the prison with their satellite trucks. On-air personalities stood beside their trucks giving live, minute-by-minute progress reports about how Spencer spent his last day. Cameramen scanned the crowd of protesters as they sang songs and prayed.Spencer's story was hot news. Not only had he killed the young women, but he did so while on work release and living nearly unsupervised in a state-operated halfway house. He'd also almost managed to get away with each of his murders because the police had arrested the wrong man, David Vasquez, for the crimes. In fact, Vasquez served several years in prison for the murders before DNA proved that Spencer was the murderer.The case of the Southside Strangler was so compelling that best-selling author Patricia Cornwell based her first book, Postmortem, on Spencer's killing spree.Spencer's appellate attorney, Barry Weinstein, fought to save his client's life up until moments before Spencer took the walk from his cell to the execution chamber. The Supreme Court of the United States denied Weinstein's final efforts to spare his client's life at approximately 10:45 P.M. — the precise time when I sat staring at Old Sparky, the state's electric chair. I was thinking that I, as a police detective, had the power to arrest criminals who might one day be placed in the very death chair standing before me. These thoughts of life and death enter the minds of many police officers throughout their careers.When the door in the back of the execution chamber opened that night, the prison's warden entered first, followed by an assistant warden, a prison doctor, and the prison chaplain. They were followed by two corrections officers. The next person to enter was Spencer. He was dressed in new prison clothes — a light-blue denim shirt and dark-blue denim pants. His prison, deck-style sneakers were light blue-grey. The pant material had been cut away from his lower right leg just below the knee, exposing the flesh. His head was shaved smooth and reflected the white lights from above.Spencer was surrounded by an execution team, an elite group of corrections officers chosen especially for this assignment. The team had rehearsed its duties many times during the days preceding this event, and it was obvious by their actions that they knew exactly what do and when to do it.I and several other witnesses looked on as Spencer settled his small-framed body into the wooden seat of Old Sparky. The execution team immediately swarmed around him like bees as they used wide straps to fasten his arms, wrists, legs, and chest to the chair. Then, as quickly as they'd surrounded him, the entire group backed away. One officer stepped forward from the team and placed a metal cap on Spencer's head.During the pre-execution briefing, an assistant warden explained to those of us who were selected as witnesses that the inside of the cap was filled with a brine-soaked sponge. The solution allows the best possible conditions for the conduction of electricity. The top of the cap is designed to allow for the connection of an electric cable, the first of two cables in a circuit that delivers a thirty-second electric shock of eighteen hundred volts. The amount of electricity used to power a normal household is 220 volts.Spencer looked confident and unafraid, sort of cocky actually, as his eyes scanned his surroundings. He glanced toward a large, round wall clock that hung above the electric chair. The same officer who had placed the cap on Spencer stepped forward again, this time to fasten a metal clamp to Spencer's bare right calf. The clamp was attached to the ground wire that completed the electric circuit.The only thing separating the killer and those of us waiting to see him die was a space of approximately twenty feet and a glass partition that didn't quite reach the ceiling.The execution chamber where Spencer sat was painted pale gray with snow-white trim and was brightly lit by several rectangular fluorescent fixtures. A telephone with a direct line to the governor of Virginia hung on the wall behind Old Sparky. The warden stood beside the phone. To the warden's right and slightly to the rear of the chamber was a small room where the executioner waited, behind a one-way mirror, for the command to initiate the first of two jolts of electricity. (Two rounds of electricity have been used since an inmate once lived through the single round that used to be delivered. After a few minutes, the executioner was ordered to complete the execution by applying a second burst.) The executioner could see out, but the prison staff, the witnesses, and Spencer couldn't see in. I could imagine the executioner's finger poised above the green button, waiting to end it all.When I glanced at the mirror I could see the reflection of the back of Spencer's head. I noticed that, in spite of the above-normal warmth of the room and the intensity of the moment, Spencer wasn't sweating. I was. The witness seated to my right was crying softly. The man to my left sat motionless and never took his eyes away from Spencer.Directly behind the condemned man was the transformer from which the deadly electricity would flow. A small, orange lightbulb on the top of the machine looked almost out of place. The warden had told us that the bulb would begin to glow brightly when the executioner had begun the first cycle. We were also told that the machine would begin to hum a bit.When the precise time for the execution arrived, the warden read the death warrant to Spencer. The brief reading basically informed the killer that he'd been sentenced to die on this date and that the warden of the facility was charged with causing him to die. Short and sweet.The warden asked Spencer if he had anything to say — any last words. He muttered, “Yeah, I think I …,” then stopped talking and looked directly toward us, the witnesses. At the last second, he had elected to remain silent and offered no words of remorse for what he'd done or for the families of his many victims.He continued to look toward us as officers placed the leather death mask over his face and secured it. I could still see his eyes through tiny slits. His gaze met mine.The execution team had completed its assignment and, with a nod from the warden, they left the chamber in single file.The chaplain approached Spencer and placed his hand on Spencer's shoulder. He began to rub Spencer's upper back a little as he quietly recited the Lord's Prayer. Spencer nodded, slightly. The chaplain ended the prayer, and the warden nodded to the person behind the mirror. Spencer sat straight and slowly turned both thumbs upward.The light on the transformer began to glow, faintly at first then suddenly it was hot orange. Spencer's body lunged tightly against the straps as the first burst of electricity hit him. It appeared as if his upper body had swollen to twice its normal size. When the first jolt was over, his body relaxed slightly. The tension in the witness room had been high, but when the first group of electrical jolts ended, the anxiety dissipated a bit. Audible sighs were heard from our group. Then suddenly the orange light began to glow brightly again. The second and less intense wave of 240 volts hit. That burst lasted for sixty seconds.He swelled again, but this time fluid gushed from beneath the mask. Small puffs of smoke rose from his exposed calf and from somewhere around his right ear. A sound similar to frying bacon could be heard coming from the chamber, and the odor of burning flesh began to drift into the witness room.The orange light went out, Spencer's body slumped, and his left arm fell limply to the side of its rest. The prison officials inside the room with Spencer stood still for five long minutes (I later learned that the time was needed to allow the body to cool down enough that the doctor could touch it without being burned).When the five minutes had passed, the prison doctor walked over to Spencer's body, placed a stethoscope to his chest for a moment, and listened. He then looked up and said, “Warden, this man has expired.” It was 11:13 P.M.A corrections officer, who had been seated near the witnesses during the entire proceeding, stood and closed a row of heavy blue drapes between the witness room and the execution chamber. A prison official then motioned for the witnesses to follow him outside where we were escorted to a waiting prison van, the same van I'd watched leave the institution after many other executions.INTERESTING DEATH PENALTY FACTSOn March 1, 2005, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled it unconstitutional to impose the death penalty on persons who were under the age of eighteen at the time of their offense.The first execution by electrocution was in 1890. The process lasted eight minutes.If a rope used for hanging is too long, it can result in a beheading. The extra length causes the falling body to generate more force than a shorter one. When the body reaches the end of the rope, the sudden stop can easily result in decapitation.The first woman to die in the electric chair was executed in 1899 at New York's Sing Sing prison.Family members of the victim and the killer are permitted to witness the execution.Texas was the first state to perform an execution by lethal injection.During execution by lethal injection, an antiseptic wipe is used to cleanse the injection site on a prisoner's arm prior to injection.On January 12, 2006, Virginia Governor Mark Warner announced that recent DNA testing confirmed that Roger Keith Coleman was, indeed, guilty of raping and killing his sister-in-law, nineteen-year-old Wanda Faye McCoy.We were taken back to our cars and to our lives. Spencer's body was now headed to the morgue for an event that can only be attended by those who are condemned to die: a prescheduled autopsy.METHODS OF EXECUTIONA handful of states still use the electric chair as a means for executing the condemned. Others use lethal injection to execute prisoners who have been sentenced to death, or they've totally abolished the death penalty as a form of punishment. Idaho and Oklahoma are the only two states where executions by firing squad are still performed, although lethal injection is the primary method used by both states. In 2004, Utah passed a law banning firing squads, although as recently as 1996 the state used the method to execute John Albert Taylor for the rape and strangulation of an eleven-year-old girl.THE ELECTRIC CHAIRThe electric chair was first used in the United States in the late 1800s and was once a favored means of executing prisoners who had been sentenced to death. However, due to a number of botched executions, its use in several states is merely an option, with many states outlawing it entirely.Eyewitnesses have reported seeing horrifying side effects of electrocution, such as smoldering flesh and the flood of fluids emitting from body openings, including the eyes. I can personally attest to some of these eyewitness accounts. An execution via electric chair can be quite gruesome.Only a handful of states still allow the use of the electric chair as an option for execution: Virginia, Florida, Tennessee, Kentucky, South Carolina, Texas, Alabama, Oklahoma, Illinois, and Nebraska.LETHAL INJECTIONCurrently, most states either already use, or plan to use, lethal injection as their primary means of executing condemned prisoners. According to an article in the April 2005 edition of New Scientist magazine, lethal injection isn't the painless and humane method of execution it was once thought to be — it's possibly just the lesser of all evils. The death penalty was suggested in the United States in 1972 but wasn't reintroduced until 1976, and the New Scientist magazine article refers to study statistics posted in the medical journal The Lancet indicating that inmates may have felt pain in forty-three of forty-nine executions by lethal injection and that, in 40 percent of those cases, the prisoners were conscious when they were put to death.Death by lethal injection is carried out in three stages by the executioner. The first step is the intravenous introduction of sodium thiopental to anaesthetize the inmate. A second chemical, pancuronium bromide, is then introduced into the bloodstream as a muscle relaxant. Finally, the technician injects potassium chloride to stop the heart.Prisoners receive a dose of approximately three grams of sodium thiopental at the time of execution. This amount is ten times that of the doses administered to a patient during a surgical procedure. If the anesthesia is properly administered, the inmate won't feel pain during the execution. Doctors and nurses are forbidden by ethical guidelines to assist with or participate in executions; therefore, technicians with no formal training in administering anesthetics perform the executions. This technician could very well be a local emergency medical technician, paramedic, or ambulance crew member. In fact, the New Scientist article went on to say that technicians in Texas and Virginia (the two have put to death more prisoners than all other states combined) have no training whatsoever. They also introduce the injections remotely via I.V., so they can't possibly monitor the anesthesia.It's interesting to note that veterinarians in the United States are advised against using muscle relaxants during the euthanasia of animals because the relaxant may hide signs that the anesthesia isn't working. If the anesthesia isn't properly administered, a prisoner may experience asphyxiation, severe burning sensations, massive muscle cramps, and — finally — cardiac arrest. Attorneys for condemned prisoners argue that this type of pain and suffering is a direct violation of the Eighth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits cruel and unusual punishment.In December of 2006, Angel Nieves Diaz was executed by lethal injection in the state of Florida. Diaz had been sentenced to death by a Florida court for the murder of the manager of a topless bar.A death that was supposed to be painless and quick took thirty-four minutes and was most likely very painful. Diaz had to be given the death-inducing chemicals twice because the needles that were supposed to be inserted into his veins were instead pushed into surrounding muscle tissue. The Florida medical examiner stated that Diaz had large chemical burns on both arms. Witnesses to the execution said that Diaz was moving, grimacing, and possibly attempting to say something as long as twenty-four minutes after he received the first chemical.As a result of the botched execution, Florida Governor Jeb Bush immediately issued an order to suspend all executions pending further review. During the same week, a federal judge in California declared that California's method of lethal injection violated the U.S. Constitution's ban on cruel and unusual punishment.In February 2007, an eleven-member review panel in Florida issued a preliminary report recommending that anyone in the position to administer lethal injections should be required to undergo training and that they monitor the level of the inmate's consciousness during an execution. The panel's final report is due to be delivered on March 1, 2007, to Governor Bush's successor, Governor Charlie Crist.
