---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0011.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["officer", "detective", "police", "one", "crime", "department", "must", "gang", "computer", "criminal", "work", "evidence", "case", "undercover", "like", "sometimes", "information", "investigation", "informant", "division", "member", "victim", "area", "often", "people"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0011html

---


4
4DETECTIVESEver see a cartoon character run off a cliff? He runs beautifully — until he looks down. Writing a novel is like running through the air; it's all about confidence. Confidence is the key requirement for crime writers lacking a background in law enforcement. Without it, no one will believe our stories. In this chapter, we are effortlessly taken through every facet of a detective's job. Sure, we get the facts — plenty of them. But the facts are integrated in such a way that we begin to understand the culture behind the detective. This is what gives us the self-assurance to make the detective's world our own.— J. CARSON BLACK, AUTHOR OF DARKNESS ON THE EDGE OF TOWN AND DARK SIDE OF THE MOONMany uniformed police officers who work their way up the chain of command strive either to obtain the position of a uniformed supervisor or move into what some officers think of as the ultimate police job — a detective.How an officer becomes a detective varies with each individual department. Some departments offer the position as a promotion. These departments post the vacant position and officers apply and test for the job, and the most qualified person receives the advancement. Promotions, or assignments to a detective division, aren't normally awarded to officers until they've completed at least five years of service. Other departments take the rivalry between uniformed officers and the plainclothes detectives into account and simply assign officers to a detective's position on a rotating basis, which allows every officer a turn as an investigator.A detective is responsible for the investigation of both misdemeanor and felony crimes. How each department carries out these investigations depends upon the size of the department. Some departments are large enough to have detectives who specialize in certain areas such as credit card fraud, homicide, juvenile crime, arson, narcotics, rape, vice, etc. (We'll look at some of these areas in greater detail later in the chapter.) Detectives sometimes work in several specialized areas before finding one they like. Once they do, they usually make that area their permanent assignment.Other departments have only a couple of detectives for the entire agency — if any. In some rural departments where manpower is limited, patrol officers serve as first responders, evidence technicians, and investigators. There are advantages to each situation. The specialized detective becomes very skilled at his particular craft, whereas a detective or patrol officer in a smaller department has the opportunity, out of necessity, to work all kinds of cases.No matter what the assignment, the duties are the same. Detectives are investigators who gather facts and collect evidence in criminal cases. They conduct interviews and interrogations, examine records and documents, observe the activities of suspects, and participate in and conduct raids or arrests. A detective is usually charged with applying for and obtaining search warrants. To accomplish these tasks effectively, detectives are trained with a more diverse approach than patrol officers.Both detectives and patrol officers are required to attend, at minimum, semiannual in-service training to stay abreast of new laws and procedures. In addition to the in-service training, a detective's education must be endlessly updated, and his base of knowledge must be constantly expanded. Criminals are continually developing new ideas and methods to get around the law, and the detective has to make every effort to stay one step ahead of them.Modern criminals are more highly educated than offenders of the past, and today's crooks rehearse and practice every aspect of their craft, like actors studying for a Broadway production. The thugs even hone their shooting skills. I was once searching the trunk of a drug dealer's vehicle and found an automatic weapon, several rounds of ammunition, and a police silhouette target. The center of the target was filled with bullet holes, and Lee Lofland was written above the head. That was an eye-opener.There are many new ways to fight crime in today's computer and technology age, but nothing can compare to the old-fashioned method of the detective getting out and beating the streets for information and clues.The image of the detective has changed as well. It has evolved from the trench-coat-wearing sleuth to a more stylishly dressed investigator. That image possibly reflects a larger clothing allowance than was once provided by departments. I think, years ago, I wore the long coat not because I was cold, but to cover my outdated cheap suits. All my sport coats had torn linings from years of friction caused by my gun's hammer constantly rubbing against the fabric. When I began my career, the pay was around $8,400 annually, with no clothing allowance. Also in those days, we had to buy our own guns, handcuffs, flashlights, raincoats, ticket books, and shoes. Oh yeah, and bullets. If we thought we might need them, we purchased a handful of those as well.Today, all expenses are paid by the officer's department, including clothing allowances for undercover officers who sometimes must wear really unusual clothing in order to blend in with their working environment.A case begins with the commission of a crime. Uniformed patrol officers are often the first officers on the scene, and they gather the pertinent information — the who, what, where, why, when, and how, if available. It's the duty of the uniformed patrol officer to secure the scene until a detective or the officer in charge relieves him. The officer who gathers the information later passes it on to the detective assigned to the case. Cases are usually assigned on a rotating basis, or a detective can be assigned to a particular case based on her particular knowledge and skills that relate to the offense. Once assigned to a case, a detective will follow it through until the case has been solved and the suspect is tried and convicted. The detective may use other officers to assist in the investigation, but the case will remain in her charge.Fact gathering is a must in police work. Detectives can only relate specific details in a court of law and may not offer opinion, as a rule, for testimony. However, during the investigation, gut feelings and instinct play a large role in the detective's search for information. Years of experience can be, and often are, the most formidable tool in the detective's arsenal. IN THE LINE OF DUTY ON BECOMING A DETECTIVEWhen I raised my right hand to take the oath to serve my state and my country, I felt a lump rise in my throat. It was such an honor and a thrill to finally be sworn in as a police officer. The feeling of putting on a uniform and pinning a shiny, silver badge to my chest was one of the greatest moments of my life. When the day finally arrived, though, to transition from a uniformed officer to a plainclothes detective, I couldn't wait to trade the uniform for a new suit and to hook a new, gold badge on my belt. After all, my childhood dream was to become an investigator, and I could finally wear cotton again instead of double-knit polyester shirts with fake buttons that zipped up the front and pants that retained enough heat to bake bread. (Of course, that cool stripe down the leg offset all negatives!)I turned in my marked patrol vehicle and received my first department-issued, unmarked car. It was an old, beat-up Chevrolet Caprice, a car I write about fondly in my books and stories. The car was midnight blue, several years old, and would reach its top speed of eighty-five miles per hour only after going downhill for about three miles. I didn't care. It was mine. I washed it, cleaned the tires and wheels, and put my things — a fishing-tackle box filled with fingerprint equipment, a shotgun with an eighteen-inch barrel, extra ammo, hand cleaner, paper towels, and a roll of crime scene tape — into the trunk. I'd get more tools later as I figured out what I needed. For now, I was ready for my first case.In my early days as a patrol officer, I looked on with envy as the detectives came in and took over my cases after I'd done the dirty work. They were the guys getting their pictures in the newspapers and getting all the glory for doing nothing … or so I thought. It took just a few months of being a detective to dream of an eight-hour shift like the old days, instead of a twenty-hour day, and of not being called out in the middle of the night, every night! The thought had never occurred to me that it would be irritating to have newspaper reporters snapping photos of me while I struggled to hold in my lunch at a gruesome homicide scene, or that reporters would write things in the paper I didn't say or leave out the important things I did say.Nobody teaches you how alienated you become from your old co-workers, the boys in blue, once you become a detective. Uniformed officers sometimes feel a bit of jealousy toward detectives, and detectives sometimes experience a bit of an unjustified superiority complex toward uniformed officers. It's a rivalry that's always been in place and probably always will be.Nobody explains the many hours you'll spend sitting in the woods, or in the bushes, with hungry mosquitoes and spiders and snakes, or in the rain or snow, watching suspects in your attempts to build cases. Nobody tells you how it feels to work undercover and to walk into the middle of a drug deal, unarmed and without a radio. Nobody describes how it feels to be shot at, spit on, beat up, kicked, scratched, stabbed, cut, knocked down, punched, and pepper sprayed (with your own pepper spray), all the while wearing a suit.Yes, I was finally a detective and it was absolutely … Glorious!DETECTIVE DIVISIONSPolice departments are divided into various specialized divisions, and those divisions are sometimes divided into even smaller, more focused groups of officers. The chart here shows the various subgroups within a detective division. These subgroups may vary depending upon the needs of individual departments.VICEVice detectives are generally charged with the investigation and prevention of crimes involving prostitution, gambling, liquor, and pornography. Narcotics is also included in this group of crimes of immorality, but, with the increase of drug use and sales, some police departments have a division specifically for drug enforcement and eradication.Vice detectives maintain files and photographs of all suspected and known offenders. These detectives must be familiar with each of the establishments within their jurisdictions that are licensed to sell and serve alcoholic beverages. They must also periodically inspect these businesses to ensure that permits are current and valid. These inspections are conducted during normal business hours. Officers may also observe activities in these businesses in an undercover capacity.Vice detectives must be willing to work odd hours and under extreme conditions, sometimes undercover. They frequent the areas where these crimes are known to occur, such as gambling establishments, bars, nightclubs, streets, and sidewalks. It's not unusual for female, and some male, vice detectives to pose as prostitutes in undercover sting operations. They must also infiltrate the makeshift unlicensed bars called “juke joints” or “nip joints.”To build their cases, vice detectives rely heavily on information they gather from informants, so it's imperative that they build a certain trust or bond with the people of the street. These street people can sometimes provide the knowledge that could save the life of officers and detectives.Vice detectives build a network of informants through a variety of means. One such means is by working out “deals” with crooks — no prosecution for their crimes in exchange for solid information about an upper-level criminal. These “snitches” must prove to the detectives that their information is indeed accurate before detectives can make any promises to them.In most cases, detectives are required to present their potential deals with informants to the prosecuting attorney who either agrees or rejects the plan. First-or second-time offenders are normally given the okay by the prosecutor to work off their charges by helping the police. A repeat offender may not receive a favorable response and must stand trial for his offense.Detectives must abide by strict rules when using informants to help build a case against a criminal. An informant first must be established as a reliable source of information. To accomplish this, most police departments require the potential informant to fill out a form detailing his reasons for wanting to help the police.Once the paperwork has been completed, the detective who'll be working with and supervising the informant signs the forms, then presents them to her commander, who approves of and signs the agreement. The informant's activities as they relate to the cases in question are closely monitored by the supervising officer and a second officer who's been assigned to assist. Sometimes male officers supervise female informants and female officers oversee male informants. The second officer is added as a witness and to prevent anything from occurring that could be later described as inappropriate.The reliability of a confidential informant (CI) in drug cases is normally established by having the informant purchase narcotics from a dealer on three separate occasions, using money that's either been marked or for which the serial numbers have been recorded.After each purchase, the drugs are delivered by the CI to the detective, who places the narcotics into a sealed container, marks it as evidence, and records the date and time of the transaction. These purchases may be used later as probable cause for obtaining a search warrant for the arrest of the dealer and/or as evidence in court.If the CI's buys are used to establish probable cause for a search warrant, the marked money will be used as evidence that the transaction took place. This isn't always a good thing to do if the detective is attempting to protect the identity of the CI because the dealer will know that the informant is the person who “set him up.”Informants always live in fear for their safety but sometimes can't stop themselves from continuing their clandestine work, usually because they love the adrenaline rush or because they're in debt so deeply to the police and the prosecutor for keeping them out of jail that they must continue.Other times, informants are people who simply desire to help police catch bad guys. They have varying reasons — some good and some not so good. Some have grudges against someone and they want to see that person get into trouble and perhaps even go to prison.Others may have attempted to become police officers and for various reasons couldn't, such as failing the entrance exam, physical agility tests, or psychological profile. For these people, becoming an informant is the next best thing. They get to hang around police officers and are sometimes exposed to some of the excitement that comes along with the job of a law enforcement officer.These informants are normally paid a small fee in exchange for their services. That fee can range anywhere from no money — just an assurance of not going to jail for crimes they've committed — to several hundred dollars or more depending upon the value of their information.STREET CRIMES AND GANGSGangs are structured organizations in which two or more people engage in criminal activity as part of that organization's purpose. There are many types of gangs, and they can be found in nearly every part of the world. Gangs are a major source of crime, and gang-related crime has become more and more prevalent in recent years. Members of these organizations hang out in, and control, certain areas of cities and towns. They claim these areas as their own and call them their “turfs.” In some cases, gangs have established turfs in outlying areas of counties. Even small areas of prisons and jails have been claimed by prison gangs as their turfs, such as portions of recreation yards, TV rooms, and dining halls. A rival gang member can't cross from one turf into another. To do so is a sign of disrespect to the opposing gang. This display of insolence can result in the death of the trespassing gang member. Gang leaders who have been incarcerated may still run their gang's activities from behind bars by sending out messages, some of which are encrypted.Gangs usually require prospective members to undergo an initiation before they're allowed into the organization. Often it's mandatory that the initiate spill the blood of another person — usually a rival gang member — through an act of physical violence such a stabbing or shooting. This initiation rite is called a “blood in.” To leave or quit the gang, a similar act must be accomplished; this is called a “blood out.”Gang members are seldom allowed to simply quit; therefore, it's not uncommon for the blood spilled during the blood out to be that of the outgoing gang member. The remaining members feel that the member who wants out knows too much about their illegal activities, so they kill him to prevent him from snitching to the authorities.Members of gangs use certain identifiers to let others know to which gang they belong. For instance, the members of a particular gang may all wear their left pant legs rolled up to mid-calf, or they may all wear their hats tilted to the right side of their heads. They may even always stand with either their right or left hands in their pockets.Tattoos are also used to identify gang members and are a large part of gang culture, like the “TS” of the Texas Syndicate prison gang or the five-pointed crown of the People Nation gang.Detectives assigned to work a gang detail or task force have the enormous task of learning the various cultures, identifiers, hand signals, signs, and slang of the gang. They must also be constantly aware of and alert to the gang's activities, since it's sometimes thought to be an honor and a privilege for a gang member to kill a law enforcement officer.Detectives have worked undercover in an attempt to infiltrate gangs, but their attempts are often in vain due to the blood-in ritual. Officers aren't allowed to participate in any illegal activity that would require them to physically harm another person. If they refuse to perform a particular ritual, they take the risk of exposing their undercover status.An undercover detective once infiltrated a notorious motorcycle gang and avoided the blood-in ritual by “killing” someone who was already dead. As part of an elaborate illusion, detectives used the body of a John Doe victim as a ruse to make it seem the undercover detective had indeed committed a murder. The detective shot the body several times during a mock drive-by shooting. The scheme worked, and as a result, the detective was allowed into the club as a full member.WHITE-COLLAR CRIMEWhite-collar crime derives its name from the particular class of workers who commit these crimes. They're the business people associated with wearing business suits, white shirts, and ties. The crimes they commit are of a nonviolent nature and usually involve bookkeeping or computer use.Detectives assigned to this area of expertise must be mathematically savvy and computer literate. They're usually college graduates with majors in accounting or computer science, and they're normally considered experts in their fields.It's the duty of the detectives in this division to track and document the activities of embezzlers, tax cheats, and other business-related criminals.HIGH-TECH CRIMESHigh-tech crime units are fairly new additions to police departments. Their tasks are easily defined — they detect and investigate criminal activity that involves technology, such as computers, laptops, identity theft, digital storage media, camcorders, digital phones, computer-based child pornography, digital cameras, and phishing.Phishing is a relatively new term for a crime that involves criminals who send fraudulent e-mails to individual parties, requesting their account numbers and passwords for various bank accounts, creditors, and other financial institutions. These e-mails appear to be legitimate.Criminals fool the recipients of these e-mails because their messages often bear the logo of the institutions they claim to represent. The links they provide to the recipients, however, don't link to the actual institutions. When the recipient of these e-mails fills out the information and sends the replies, the messages transmit directly to the crooks, who then have access to the victim's personal information. They use this information to access the victim's bank accounts, get cash from ATM machines, obtain credit cards, and buy big-ticket items like cars, boats, and jewelry. The losses can be devastating, and it can take victims years to repair their damaged credit histories.Detectives in this highly specialized field receive their training from various agencies such as the International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists (IACIS) or the National White Collar Crime Center. The IACIS is a non-profit volunteer organization staffed by law enforcement personnel who help to train, certify, and recertify both new and experienced forensic examiners.During their training, detectives are taught the laws of search and seizure as they apply to technology. They're schooled on the many aspects of computers and how they're operated — legally and illegally. They learn how data is stored; how to recover deleted files; how to examine boot files, temporary files, cache files, history files, and registry files; and how to search unused or blank space for deleted information.Other classes instruct detectives on how to examine hard drives for hidden or encrypted messages, how to break passwords, how to detect Trojan horses, and how to discover devices that can destroy a computer and its inner workings.The fees for a basic training course vary throughout the industry, but they average between six hundred and seven hundred dollars.Police departments operate on very limited budgets, and the start-up and operation of a high-tech investigative unit can be a burden, especially to smaller departments. For example, a basic forensic computer can cost in excess of five thousand dollars, an additional twelve hundred dollars for the hardware write blockers (devices attached between a suspect's computer and its storage device to monitor the computer's activity), two thousand dollars for forensic software, and two thousand dollars for cables and software. All totaled, equipment and training for just a few officers can quickly total forty thousand dollars or more in start-up costs.A forensic computer is unlike any other computer. It's designed especially for computer forensics and has a very large capacity for memory. Detective Josh Moulin, a forensic computer examiner and supervisor of the Central Point, Oregon, Police Department's High-Tech Crimes Unit, operates a forensic computer with 1 terabyte of storage, twin nineteen-inch monitors, two gigabytes of RAM, an Intel P4 3.4 GHz processor, and removable drive trays. Detective Moulin's division provides assistance to many other agencies that aren't equipped to investigate high-tech computer crimes. The department also assists the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, and various state police agencies.The hardware write blocker (HWD) is an essential tool for high-tech crime detectives. Its principle is simple: It allows information to flow in one direction only — from the suspect's computer directly into the forensic computer — never in reverse. The information is stored on the forensic computer for later examination and evidence collection.The HWD functions much like the foot valve in a water line that's connected to a pump and well system. The valve opens when the pump (in this case, the HWD) pulls water (information) toward a house (forensic computer) but closes tightly when the pumping stops so the leftover water in the lines can't return to the well (the suspect's computer).The one-way action of the HWD is designed to prevent cross-contamination of evidence. It doesn't allow any information from the forensic computer to find its way into the suspect's computer — an incident that an attorney could use as a defense. It could be compared to planting evidence, such as a bloody knife or glove at a homicide scene.To prevent the police from detecting their illegal activities, criminals have devised several ways to destroy evidence of their crimes. They've attempted to demolish their hard drives by drilling holes into them; they've smashed the hard drives with sledgehammers, and they've submerged them in acid — the only true way to destroy data. Even with several holes drilled into the drive, forensics experts have been able to retrieve some data from the damaged computers.The Central Point, Oregon, Police Department's High-Tech Crimes Unit is, as are most departments, very proactive when it comes to online investigations. The computer age, along with Web sites and chat rooms, has made it easier than ever for sexual predators to stalk their prey. Men are using computers to find underage sex partners because it's much easier to meet kids online than to approach them in public places like parks and shopping malls.Departments all across the country have begun to stalk the predators that stalk our children. In the quaint village of Yellow Springs, Ohio, Officer Matt Hoying spends several hours each week online posing as a fourteen-year-old girl in hopes of nabbing a sexual predator. He's been quite successful — since he began the project, he's averaged at least one arrest per week. Men have made the trek from nearby cities to meet the teen girl (Officer Hoying) that they've met online — one even rode a bicycle nearly twenty miles to meet his underage date.Much of Officer Hoying's time online is spent chatting with adult men in a Web site chat room named “I Love Much Older Men.” Using chat room lingo that sounds as if it's coming straight from the keyboard of a giggling teen, he responds to questions asked by the men — some of whom claim to be engineers, truck drivers, and even police officers. Some are young and some are old; some are married while some are single; some are rich and some are poor; some are friendly and outgoing and others are loners. They're your next-door neighbors.Quite often the men portray themselves as handsome, rich, and successful. They tell the young girls that they drive expensive cars and wear expensive jewelry and clothing. In reality, a lot of the guys are poor, unkempt, and dirty. They live in squalor where their most prized possessions are their computers and their pornography collections.Officer Hoying's fingers tap out chat room slang such as LOL (laughing out loud), TTYL (talk to you later), MMLOMS (my mom's looking over my shoulder), ROFLMAO (rolling on the floor laughing my ass off), and a/s/l (age/sex/location). Training for detectives who work Internet sting operations involves teaching them how a teen would respond to questions, how to answer those questions without entrapping the suspect, how to properly use online slang, and how to surf the chat rooms frequented by sexual predators.The conversations are initiated by male suspects almost immediately after detectives log on to a Web site. Usually not more thirty seconds passes before an unsuspecting man makes the first contact. Within ten minutes officers have more requests to chat than they can possibly handle. They pick one or two targets and disregard the rest. They consider a good target suspect to be one who lives close to the detective's jurisdiction. Close proximity means there's more of a chance that the suspect will want to meet the girl face-to-face.Talk quickly turns to sex. The men ask the young girls if they're virgins (a popular question), if they desire older men for sex partners, and if they've ever given or received oral sex. The next line of questioning usually begins with questions about the girl's parents. Are they home? How long will they be gone?Within minutes, the questions begin to flow at a rapid-fire pace. Do you have a boyfriend? Is he there? Do you have sex with him? Have you ever had sex with an older man? Have you ever had sex with one of your girlfriends? What are you wearing? Do you like to masturbate? The questions are followed by the men sending photographs of themselves to the young boys and girls. The first volleys of pictures are of men in various poses — fully clothed or shirtless. As they send more and more, the men are posed in less and less clothing, and — in some — they're totally nude.At this point, the detectives discover whether or not the men want to meet the girl or if they're only looking for a cyber-partner to engage in mutual online masturbation. The conversation will either shift to questions about a possible meeting or the men will push the conversation toward just sex talk. If the talk heads into the direction of just sex talk, the detectives save a printed copy of the conversation for future evidence and log off that particular chat. They continue this process until someone asks to meet in person. Each online conversation is saved and printed for later use in court.The men who are arrested for this crime are normally quite passive at the time of their arrests. They rarely ever resist arrest and seldom attempt to run from the police. They're sometimes open about their intentions, but most try to explain their reasons for wanting to meet an underage girl or boy. They offer explanations of just wanting to talk; they say that they knew the child was alone and only wanted to make sure they were safe from danger. Some freely admit that they were hoping to have sex with the children.Sexual predators of children are often bold enough to meet the children in their own homes while their parents are away. With the recent attention by police and the media to this type of crime, the offenders have begun to conduct their own countersurveillance. They drive by the neighborhoods or parks where they're supposed to meet their victims, looking for anything out of the ordinary. They search for people who look like undercover detectives. They search for video cameras, unmarked police vehicles, and even media personnel and their vehicles.Convictions for sex offenders — rapists, child molesters, and child pornographers — generally result in a lengthy prison sentence. At the completion of their sentences, the offenders are required to register with their local law enforcement agencies. They must provide a current address — they're not permitted to live near areas where children are known to frequent, such as schools, parks, and playgrounds — and they must report to their probation officers on a regular basis.RAPE AND SEXUAL ASSAULTDetectives assigned to investigate crimes of rape and sexual assault receive specialized training in the investigation of cases involving rape, incest, domestic violence, stalking, and sexual assault. They learn to recognize the signs and symptoms of abuse by family members. They also maintain a close working relationship with local centers for the prevention of domestic and family violence, and with other agencies that provide representatives who serve as victims' advocates.It's crucial that victims of sexual assault are made to feel as comfortable as possible during the interview process and throughout their medical treatment and examination. It's also imperative for the victim to be examined by a physician or a specially trained Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner as soon as possible after the assault to protect and preserve any physical evidence the attacker might have left behind, such as hairs, clothing fibers, saliva, and semen.Detectives and the victim's advocate accompany the victim to a hospital or doctor's office for the examination and treatment of injuries. The physician conducts a physical examination of the victim using a prepackaged Physical Evidence Recovery Kit (PERK). Victims of sexual assault sometimes request that the victim's advocate, who's usually female, and female officers and detectives remain with them during the exam and evidence recovery. It's not a legal requirement for a police officer to be present during the examination. The physician or nurse can be summoned to court to testify regarding the evidence and its collection.Detectives who work in sexual assault divisions are responsible for monitoring convicted sex offenders and their activities. Task forces within these divisions have been created specifically to supervise and monitor the court-ordered terms and conditions of probation and parole and the release of high-risk sexual offenders from prison.NARCOTICSNarcotics officers, or narcs as they're commonly called by criminals, work in one of the most dangerous divisions within a police department. It's their job to prevent or reduce the manufacturing and sale of illegal drugs. To effectively battle this ever-present and increasing problem, it's necessary for these officers to work extremely odd hours, often in harsh conditions.Detectives who work as narcotics officers receive specialized training in drug recognition, search warrant preparation and execution, rules and laws of evidence and procedure, firearms, and self-defense and defensive tactics. Many narcotics officers are designated to undercover duty. They're schooled in the mannerisms, slang, and cultures of the communities where they're assigned. They learn to walk and talk like their target suspects, which enables them to blend into the local groups or gangs.Narcotics officers aren't permitted to use, nor do they use, illegal drugs as part of their cover. Obviously, the use of mind-altering substances would reduce the officers' ability to reason and react effectively in emergency situations. In addition, they wouldn't be able to testify in court regarding events that had taken place during the time of their intoxication.Narcotics officers often wear long hair, beards, and shabby clothing. They sometimes drive old beat-up cars and possess fake driver's licenses and IDs that coincide with their false identities. These officers must live their assumed roles to avoid detection by criminals.The drug culture is so vast, and covers such an enormous territory, that it's become necessary for police agencies to form multi-jurisdictional task forces. These task forces can be comprised of members from several police agencies, such as police departments; sheriff's offices; state police; the FBI; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; the National Guard; the U.S. Coast Guard; the U.S. Border Patrol; and the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA).Joint membership in a federally sponsored task force offers the participating agencies more manpower at no cost to local departments and allows free access to expensive government-owned equipment. Officers who are members of these elite teams can be sworn in by any of the participating agencies. This action provides the members with arrest powers in those jurisdictions, allowing them to travel and work anywhere in the country if necessary.HOMICIDEOf all the detective divisions, the homicide division is probably the one most familiar to the general public, due to the ever-increasing popularity of television shows that feature homicide detectives. The specially trained homicide detectives delve into the mysteries surrounding death by unnatural circumstances.Detectives who work in homicide divisions are afforded unique pieces of evidence — human bodies. A corpse is a macro-environment where countless pieces of micro-evidence lay waiting for discovery. Homicide detectives piece together their cases much like a child assembles a jigsaw puzzle, only in reverse. They begin the investigation with the full puzzle — a body — laid out in front them. Puzzle pieces — evidence — must be carefully removed, examined, cataloged, and filed. These bits and pieces of evidence are the clues that will eventually lead the detective to the murderer.A clue can be as small as a clothing fiber or a human hair or even smaller, a piece of slimy, coiled DNA. Clues can also be large and obvious, like a person's name tattooed on the victim's skin or a wallet found at the scene filled with a killer's identification.Detectives must wade through what is sometimes a mountain of evidence, using whatever tools may be available to arrive at their conclusions. They must determine which of the items they've discovered are evidence and which are not, taking care not to discard what could later prove to be a valuable piece of evidence.Homicide detectives must be alert and extremely observant. Sometimes the tiniest clue solves the case. Detectives assigned to work homicide must also be top-notch interrogators.A good homicide detective is the chameleon of police officers. He can effectively converse with people from all walks of life. He knows the talk and the jive of the street, and he knows what it's like to wear a suit and tie while sipping the finest wine. He's a good actor and an extremely good liar. He has what it takes to stand toe-to-toe with a cold-blooded killer, look her in the eye, and tell her he has enough evidence to send her to the electric chair — when in actuality the only evidence he has is a gut feeling.Homicide detectives receive intensive training in crime scene investigations, evidence collection, bloodstain and spatter evidence, crime scene photography, ballistics, and interview and interrogation techniques. They attend the autopsies of their victims and notify their next of kin of the death. They often attend the victim's funerals and graveside services, hoping the killer is doing the same — they often do.Homicide detectives see life in a way that most people never will. They witness it through the eyes of the dead. It's the job of the murder investigator to discover the identities of killers; sometimes she must even use her skills to learn the identities of the dead.INTERNAL AFFAIRSThere's a detective for every type of investigation, every crime imaginable, and every donut shop in town. All of those detectives take pride in their work, and they eventually settle into a niche that becomes their area of specialty. The one area of investigation that causes even the most seasoned detective to cringe is that of internal affairs.An assignment to the Internal Affairs Division (IAD) is often called the “kiss of death.” To investigate a fellow officer for anything is considered by some an act of treason. The silent, unspoken loyalty code among officers is one of the most substantial and solid bonds I've ever encountered. No gang on the face of this earth has a more loyal membership. I've seen police officers fight for one another, lie for one another, and cheat for one another. No one, but no one, can say anything bad about one of the men or women in blue and come away unscathed.Police officers can be a vindictive group. Revenge is the word. Hurt one of their gang, or spew hateful words against the brethren, and see how long it takes to receive a speeding ticket or find your car in the police impound lot. There are rotten eggs in any profession — police agencies are no different. Those bad eggs are the “dirty cops.” To ensure that those eggs are gathered before they hatch into evil monsters, a checks-and-balances system must be put into place. The balancing weight in this case is internal affairs.These specially trained detectives are typically responsible for the required background investigations of police officer applicants, officer-involved shootings, and illegal or corrupt activities by police officers and other non-sworn department employees. The investigations can range from minor matters, such as speeding tickets received by police officers, to homicide investigations. A good means of lessening the animosity toward IAD investigators is to (as some experienced chiefs and sheriffs do) rotate each detective through the IAD department, giving everyone a turn in the dreaded division.A chief who decides that his IAD detectives and his criminal detectives should become one and the same can cause horrendous problems for those detectives. From the moment the other detectives discover that the criminal detectives have been assigned to the IAD, they begin to shun them. The detectives who were once their close friends soon give the cold shoulder. Requests for backup receive slow responses — if any at all, no matter how urgent the plea. Invitations to go out for coffee or to have a drink after the shift cease. Their workout partners and fishing buddies suddenly have “other things” to do — and their families may soon begin receiving various traffic citations.Internal affairs detectives are notorious for their secret files of information about each department employee. Rumors are abundant about the content of those files. While it's true that IADs maintain files on officers, the files normally contain only information of officer misconduct, not details about which officer is sleeping with whom. Of course, if the “whom” is another officer, there's a good chance that tidbit is tucked neatly — with pictures — into a private folder deep within the walls of the IAD.Internal affairs detectives aren't normally assigned to regular criminal cases. They do, however, observe how other detectives and uniformed officers handle their cases. Some internal affairs detectives are responsible for observing and noting special situations, such as officer stress. These investigators are often the source of information for department psychologists regarding an officer's early signs of posttraumatic stress disorder.Patrol officers and detectives know it's not usually good news to be called into an internal affairs detective's office. Internal investigations are conducted in the same manner as any criminal interview. The officer is read his Miranda warnings and is informed of his rights according to department grievance procedures and union rules. He has a right to have an attorney present, as well as a representative of his choosing for any internal hearing not of a criminal nature, such a departmental rule infraction.If the IAD finds an officer negligent in her duties, any number of disciplinary actions can be taken. The punishments can range from a simple reprimand to suspension with or without pay to termination of employment. If the offense is criminal in nature, the officer can be arrested. Depending upon the severity of the criminal charge, the IAD detectives decide whether they'll seek an arrest warrant or turn the task over to another agency, such as the state police, FBI, or DEA.It's never pleasant to see a friend or co-worker break the rules, or the law, and it's even more unpleasant when that particular co-worker is a police officer. For whatever the reason, it happens, and it's left to the investigators of the IAD to bring those rogue cops to justice. IN THE LINE OF DUTY THE SHOOTOUTHow police officers are treated by their own departments has a huge impact on how they bounce back from an officer-involved shooting. This includes access to appropriate psychological debriefing and counseling when needed.— LAURENCE MILLER, PH.D., CLINICAL, FORENSIC, AND POLICE PSYCHOLOGISTAlthough detectives are normally assigned to specialized divisions, they're often called on to assist in other areas of law enforcement, such as backing up fellow officers when they're faced with dangerous situations. Such was the case when I, a detective, was called on to back up a group of uniformed patrol officers who were engaged in a standoff with an armed and desperate bank robber.It was a sweltering August morning when a young man invited me to join the ranks of killers. I never in my wildest of dreams would have thought I'd accept such an invitation, nor would I have thought I could ever take a human life. It was surprising to learn how easy it is to kill.Less than thirty minutes from the time the robber fled the bank parking lot, with gun in hand, in his father's beat-up station wagon, he had first locked himself out of the car, then wrecked it, lost most of the stolen money, and had a dye pack blow up in his face. Dozens of police officers were speeding toward him from all directions, and he was, unknowingly, moments away from death and from changing the lives of many good people.I looked on as the robber loaded his weapon while squatting behind the old, beat-up station wagon. To his left, in the midst of a group of small maples, I stood watching his every move, all the while pleading with him to drop his weapon. He didn't acknowledge my presence; in fact, I don't believe he ever knew I was there. He was fixated on officers who had positioned themselves on the crest of a hill, barely in sight of the soon-to-be-dead robber. He appeared to be disconnected from the reality of the circumstances as he calmly turned his gun's cylinder, one click at a time, placing the tiny pieces of ammunition into their respective slots.Suddenly, and without warning, he snapped the drum back into place and looked up. He was ready.Using my portable radio, I called to my fellow officers and informed them of the circumstances. The situation was no longer the norm — this bad guy was not going to be coming out with his hands up. This young man was going to shoot it out with the police, and I already felt within my heart that someone was going to die.The robber squatted at the rear bumper of the car, elbows resting on his thighs and both hands tightly clenching the revolver. His lips moved occasionally, saying something to himself or to an imaginary conspirator.Suddenly, he stood and fired a shot in the direction of my co-workers. He had offered his formal invitation, and I accepted without a second thought by placing a carefully aimed round through the right rear window of the car and into the side of his head, just below a freckled cheekbone.As academy students, we were taught to shoot the center mass of our targets, meaning the center of whatever portion of the body that's visible. After firing his first shot, the bank robber ducked behind his car, leaving only his head discernible through the long, rear side glass of the car's window. His head was the target for which I aimed, and that was the target I hit with my first round of return fire. I looked toward my fellow officers to see if the robber had somehow struck one of them with his wild shot. It was this moment when I first became aware of the slow motion and muted sounds.On the hill to my left and directly in front of the suspect I saw uniformed police officers standing ready, in two separate groups of two, in various stances, some with feet spread and others with one foot in front of the other. All had their weapons trained toward the robber; all used a portion of a patrol vehicle for cover, be it a door or a fender, and all were yelling fiercely for the robber to put down his gun and surrender. It was obvious, by their strained expressions and frantic actions, that they were united by one common element: fear. It was also odd that their every movement was extremely slow and deliberate. They had switched from 78 rpm to 331/3 rpm in a single muzzle flash.During the slow motion I took the time to examine the faces of my partners. Terror and foreboding had replaced calm; furrowed brows and clenched jaws replaced composure. My eyes moved, gradually, from one group of officers to the other. Their lips moved, slowly but forcefully, yet there were no sounds. Droplets of spittle trailed silent words, words nearly frozen in place by the horror-induced time warp. I saw tiny blue puffs of smoke waft from the steel barrels of their weapons, but again, I heard nothing. I recall seeing a golden retriever held on a leash by a gray-haired, grandfatherly man. I saw the two, from the corner of my eye, standing on an overpass watching the shootout unfold. The dog's mouth was opening and closing, and his head was jerking violently as dog's heads do when barking. I couldn't hear a single sound.I turned my attention back to the robber. He stood, with measured erratic movements and blood trickling from the neat little round bullet hole in his left cheek, and fired another round. My stomach turned over once when I suddenly realized he was smiling. He was enjoying the situation and was apparently very pleased with himself.It seemed five minutes had passed before I finally pulled my gun up from my side and into a firing position. I shot again and the bullet snapped into the man's narrow chest, a little to the left of dead center.He folded to the ground. His fall resembled the movements of a carpenter's folding ruler. His black T-shirt, with white lettering, began to darken and glisten with wetness. I stood unmoving, with my gun trained on his still body, for what felt like hours, watching the earth around him change colors. Like a twisting and turning kaleidoscope, the soil transformed from its natural color into a glistening, rusty red hue.The man, destined to depart this life, was so intent on dying that he didn't realize he had nearly achieved his goal, and minutes later he would indeed reach that end. He stood three more times and fired a single round each time, aiming at no one target in particular. I returned fire, round for round, with each of my bullets hitting him each time. When the fifth round from my gun struck him, he fell to the ground for the final time. I called to everyone on the radio and calmly uttered two simple words: “It's over.”The slow motion stopped as suddenly as it had begun, and I remember hearing the tiny chirps of birds in the tree canopy above my head. The retriever's yelping and frenzied barks bounced off my eardrums, and sirens were screaming in the distance as more and more police officers responded to the emergency call.Together, a sheriff's deputy and I approached the dying man as he lay face down bleeding among the weeds and debris on the roadside. His breathing was labored and sounded as if there was more liquid than air in his lungs. His legs twitched and quivered like those of a deer felled by a hunter's bullet.His hands were beneath his body and, upon rolling him over to place handcuffs on his bloody wrists, we discovered he was still clutching the gun. His index finger was inside the trigger guard, and he was repeatedly squeezing the trigger of the empty weapon.He died laying amid blood, garbage, and a million questions. A total of sixty-eight rounds had been fired by police officers, a police vehicle had been nearly destroyed by gunfire, the suspect was dead, and I had a hollow feeling in my soul that hasn't gone away to this day. When he died, he took a piece of me with him that I never regained.UNDERCOVER OFFICERSPolice officers who work undercover are usually detectives from one division or another within a police department. Any officer, from any section of a police department, may be called upon to work a covert assignment; however, to work in the capacity as an undercover officer (UC), they must first learn to rid themselves of all the habits that would give them away as cops. Police officers have a tendency to walk with their arms out and away from their bodies a bit more than the average person, because they're so used to wearing a gun. If police officers allow their arms to hang normally at their sides, the hammer of their sidearms (pistols or revolvers) will cut, scratch, or scrape the skin near their elbows.Police officers prefer to sit with their backs to the wall when in public buildings, such as restaurants. This habit allows the officer to watch the entrance and exits of the business, and it prevents a criminal from sneaking up on him. Officers have a tendency to absent-mindedly tug upward on their belts and waistbands — pulling up their pants, because they're used to the weight of the equipment hanging from their Sam Browne belts.Police officers are naturally suspicious of people, so they have a tendency to examine others carefully with their eyes, watching every move. They stand with a familiar defensive stance — one foot slightly forward with their gun-hand side to the rear. Police officers look people directly in the eyes when speaking, and they wear clothing that almost spells out the word cop, such as the combination of black, spit-shined shoes with jeans.Seasoned police officers ask questions — lots of them. They constantly interrogate people; they're hyperaware of their surroundings, and they drive defensively, always wearing their seatbelts and their hands positioned at the 10 and 2 positions on the steering wheel. These are all great traits for uniformed police officers, but not for cops who are attempting to hide their identities.Crooks look for these surefire signs of police officers. They watch the actions of anyone new in their group, and they ask questions. They ask if the stranger is a police officer, and they sometimes test the newcomers by asking them to perform illegal acts.It's an eerie experience to be surrounded by a roomful of some of the most monstrous people on earth and have them ask if you're a police officer. I've encountered this situation on many occasions, and I've managed to convince the thugs that I was one of them simply by laughing and saying, “Hell, no, I'm not a cop. Are you?” I've heard drug dealers make the statement to one another that cops can't lie if asked that question. They couldn't be more wrong. I've attended training given by the DEA and police academies that teaches undercover officers how to lie, and lie effectively.Officers can be forced to expose their identities, or blow their covers, if a heinous crime is about to take place. They must stop the commission of any capital crime, such as murder or rape. Sometimes the officers are fortunate and can stop the crime by alerting back-up officers and having them foil the crime, which allows the undercover officer to retain his secret identity.Police officers have been known to work “deep undercover,” keeping their identities hidden for periods as long as two to three years. This deep undercover mission is the most difficult assignment an officer can encounter. Working in an assumed role for such a lengthy period can have adverse effects. The officer can easily succumb to a criminal lifestyle. He's surrounded by the criminal element for so long he begins to think and act like the very criminals who are the targets of his investigation. Undercover officers sometimes develop actual friendships with these criminals. It's important for a department to rotate undercover assignments to prevent officers from giving in to the pressures associated with the project.Police officers are human. They have emotions like anyone else, and they can become sympathetic or emotionally attached to their target criminals; therefore, it's up to supervisors to monitor the officer's well-being and state of mind. In the event that adverse mannerisms or behaviors develop in the officer's character, her assignment to the mission should be terminated immediately.Undercover officers normally dress like the people they're trying to arrest. If the group in question is a motorcycle gang, the officer will wear jeans and leather; if his target crowd is wealthy, a suit and tie and a Rolex watch (borrowed) might be appropriate.Carrying a gun can be difficult when working undercover; however, there are many pistols and holsters that make the task a little easier. One officer, whom I'll refer to as Special Agent X to protect his identity, carries a Sig Sauer P232. It's a small pistol capable of holding only seven rounds of ammunition (six in the magazine plus one in the chamber). Special Agent X looks like a typical blue-collar factory or construction worker. He conducts his daily police duties while wearing cargo-style shorts, a cotton T-shirt with a bright green marijuana leaf covering the chest area, work boots, and white crew socks. His long hair is graying and pulled back into a ponytail. He maintains a few day's growth of salt-and-pepper whiskers on his cheeks and chin.His holster — designed and used by the Israeli army — is sold by Fobus Holsters. It's very compact and fits snugly inside the waistband of his pants. A T-shirt easily conceals the portion of the pistol that protrudes above his waistband. That small handgun is sometimes an undercover officer's only security. Many undercover officers aren't even allowed that option — criminals often pat down newcomers to their group. Strangers aren't allowed to carry guns until they've proven their loyalty.Undercover officers participate in the service of search warrants and in the arrests of the criminals they've been observing. Normally, when the arrests and search warrants are carried out, the officers wear masks to hide their identities. Officers are also required to attend and testify during the court proceedings of the criminals they've arrested. Some judges will close their courtrooms to the public during those trials. Others permit the undercover officers to testify while wearing masks.An undercover officer wears a mask to protect his identity.
