---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0016.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["dna", "evidence", "sample", "testing", "peak", "person", "crime", "case", "one", "used", "suspect", "body", "also", "victim", "scientist", "test", "even", "must", "cell", "locus", "law", "enforcement", "item", "two", "chromosome"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0016html

---


9
9DNAThe science of DNA profiling is sound. But not all DNA profiling is sound.— DR. DAN KRANE, CEO, FORENSIC BIOINFORMATICS, INC.Essentially, humans are all the same. We're only separated genetically by a scant 0.5 percent of our total DNA. The remaining 99.5 percent is identical. That 0.5 percent, however, has taken the world of crime solving by storm. Although DNA is fairly new to law enforcement, its roots have been firmly implanted within the scientific community for more than a century.Over the years, DNA evidence testing has become a valuable tool for law enforcement. It has aided detectives in cases that were otherwise impossible to prove. Items once thought to be too small for testing, or even for use as clues, are now the solid foundation of murder and rape cases.DNA evidence tests are capable of providing us with invaluable scientific proof of physical contact between an assailant and a victim. The tests can also be used to eliminate a person as a suspect or to link several crime scenes to the same perpetrator.DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID (DNA): THE NEW EVIDENCETough-guy police detectives who strong-armed confessions from two-bit thugs are things of the past. The investigators of today have not only filled their crime-solving toolboxes with the standard hammer and nails of law enforcement (guns and search warrants), they've also tossed science and technology into the mix. For the first time in the history of policing, cops have begun to use words like mitochondria and electropheragram. Not only do they say those words, they also know what they mean.For the past two decades, more and more crimes have been solved not in back alleys, poolrooms, and crack houses but in laboratories filled with whirring and buzzing machinery. Forensic scientists — the law enforcement officials who wear white lab coats, safety goggles, and paper booties — are discovering the answers to some of the world's most heinous crimes, and they're doing it with something that's barely visible to the naked eye: deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA.To better understand how crimes are solved using science, the law enforcement community (police officers, prosecutors, defense attorneys, judges, investigators, crime scene technicians, and laboratory personnel) must know what DNA is, how to collect it, and how to test it so it can be used as a tool for suspect identification or elimination. They must also know how to present their findings in a court of law.DNA is the genetic blueprint for building a person. It's inherited from both the mother and the father and is found in almost every cell of the human body (except for red blood cells).The combination of DNA found in the nucleus of each cell is what gives each individual the characteristics that make him uniquely different from the next person. The human genome — the body's entire collection of genes — is composed of three billion base pairs. The specific order of these pairs makes up a gene, and a gene's specific location on a chromosome is called a locus (plural: loci). A variation of a particular gene (the genetic marker) at any given locus is called an allele.Each cell in the human body is composed of twenty-three pairs of chromosomes — one set from the mother and one from the father — for a total of forty-six chromosomes. Twenty-two of those pairs are called autosomes; the final pair is the sex chromosomes, XY in males and XX in females. The Y chromosome is the male chromosome that differentiates the two sexes. It determines how much, if any, facial hair is present, the tone of voice, and the differences in genitalia.Both males and females have the X chromosome. Females begin life with two active X chromosomes, but in early embryonic stages one of those X chromosomes becomes inactive. The process that causes the inactivity of the X chromosome forms what's known as a Barr body. Under a microscope, a Barr body has the appearance of a small appendage that's attached to the cell's nucleus. Barr bodies make it possible for forensic scientists to learn the sex of a badly decomposed or dismembered body by looking at the nucleus of a single cell. Barr body testing is also used in some sporting competitions to ensure that everyone who claims to be a female is indeed a female.DNA SEQUENCE (GENETIC FINGERPRINT)DNA is rather long as molecules go: It's a polymer composed of sugars, phosphate, and other organic bases that form a twisted ladder-like configuration that we all recognize as the double helix. Within the helix, the ladder rungs are comprised of four paired molecules called bases. The bases are adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine (AGCT). These four bases can only pair together in certain patterns — T only bonds to A, and C only bonds to G, so the only possible combinations are CG, GC, TA, and AT.Each human cell is composed of three billion base-long DNA sequences. When forensic scientists look at someone's DNA, they only look at a short sequence of the base patterns, such as the sequence, CACGATACTTATTTATT-TATCCGAGCCTA. When scientists look at that sequence more closely, they see that a grouping of bases (TTAT) is repeated, CACGATACTTATTTATTTATCC-GAGCCTA. These repetitions are called short tandem repeats, or STRs. That pattern of STRs is what identifies someone as an individual. That unique and repetitive pattern is a person's genetic fingerprint.IDENTICAL DNANormally, no two humans have the same DNA, except in the case of identical twins. The exception to this rule, according to Wright State University professor and world renowned DNA expert Dr. Dan Krane, is that out of every 459,000 pairs of siblings, 3 of those pairs should have matching DNA at all 26 loci. Dr. Krane further states that there are five thousand pairs of nontwins in the United States whose DNA matches identically, which could cause the police to arrest an innocent person. A mistake such as this could also send the wrong person to the electric chair.WORKING WITH DNA EVIDENCEThe DNA collection and testing process is complicated and can take many weeks or months to complete. It can also be very expensive for police agencies (sometimes more than two thousand dollars per test), especially if a detective has submitted several articles of evidence. Law enforcement usually requires and relies upon testing to be completed at twenty-six (thirteen pairs) specific loci on the DNA.An investigator can obtain DNA samples from various places on or in the body such as saliva, skin tissue, sweat, bone, blood, earwax, mucus, urine, semen, vaginal cells, rectal cells, and the shaft of a human hair. Unless the sample is given voluntarily, a court order or search warrant is required before evidence may be collected. A warrant isn't normally required when DNA samples are collected from a murder victim during an autopsy.A detective can also collect a suspect's DNA evidence from items such as dirty laundry, cigarette butts, hats, gloves, and bite marks. She can find samples under a victim's fingernails, on the victim's body, or on bedding or clothing. Only an extremely small sample is required for testing purposes.ACCIDENTAL TRANSFER OF DNA EVIDENCELaboratory technicians and evidence collectors must protect the evidence at all times. There are many possible means by which evidence can be exposed to cross-contamination — the mixing of one person's DNA with that of another. It's actually quite easy to transfer DNA evidence. When evidence is transferred from a person to an item, it's called a primary transfer of evidence. When evidence is transferred from one item to another, it's called secondary transfer. Tertiary transfer occurs when the DNA that's been transferred to a second item is again transferred to a third item.Coughing, sneezing, or touching one's mouth or nose then touching the area to be tested are all means of cross-contaminating a sample. DNA can also be transferred to an item simply by a person touching that item. That same DNA can be transferred to people who then use that item, such as a towel that's been used by someone else. DNA can even be transferred from one article of clothing to another in a washing machine.Evidence that's been cross-contaminated will exhibit false results and could be used to convict the innocent and allow the guilty to go free. To prevent these false results, detectives must wear gloves when handling evidence, and they must change them frequently to prevent the transmission of trace material from one item to another. Evidence collection tools and equipment have to be thoroughly cleaned or disposed of after each crime scene. Also, detectives, first responders, evidence technicians, criminalists, patrol officers, news reporters, and anyone else who may have reason to be in or around a crime scene should take care to protect themselves against the possibility of exposure to blood-borne pathogens such as HIV and hepatitis.PRESERVING DNA EVIDENCEInvestigators must preserve and protect collected DNA evidence from contamination and degradation. DNA samples can deteriorate over a period of time, but a refrigerated sample may be preserved for years. Heat, humidity, exposure to ultraviolet light, and the presence of bacteria can increase the breakdown of the sample. Samples that have been properly preserved can be tested with positive results tens of thousands of years later. On the other hand, a body that's been dumped into a swamp during the heat of the summer may only retain DNA worthy of testing for mere days. Bacteria that feed on a body produce liquid waste, and once DNA has been broken down by bacteria it's no longer a link to the body from which it came. Trying to extract a victim's DNA from a bacterium would serve no purpose; the DNA simply wouldn't be there.An investigator should never package an item of evidence for DNA testing in plastic. Plastic encourages a growth environment for harmful bacteria, which can destroy the sample, rendering once-good evidence impossible to test. The Nicole Brown Simpson murder case provides a good example. Wet evidence was accidentally allowed to sit for hours in the back of the crime scene investigation truck in the California heat. O.J. Simpson's defense team jumped on this oversight, creating a reasonable presumption of evidence degradation and contamination for the jury to ponder.All items containing possible DNA evidence should be carefully collected and packaged in new paper bags or paper packaging material. The evidence should also be kept away from moisture and allowed to air dry.DNA evidence has to be kept at room temperature and away from direct sunlight. Investigators should transport evidence in a manner that prevents it from contacting moisture, and they should never place the evidence package on a car seat where it could be possibly come into contact with spilled coffee, soft drinks, or rain from an open window.Police officers should never assume that an item doesn't contain DNA evidence. Anything is a potential source for that case-solving piece of DNA — hats, used tissues, condoms, toilet tissue, drinking glasses, hairbrushes and combs, dentures, and even carpeting (which can contain dandruff, skin cells, and body hair).DNA TESTINGThe sole purpose of DNA testing in criminal cases is to include or exclude people as suspects in a crime. Forensic scientists spend hours running DNA tests just to be able to report one of three things: Yes, this person can be eliminated as a suspect; yes, this person can be included as a suspect; or, this person can neither be included nor excluded as a suspect.DNA testing has come a long way in a very short time. Scientists are constantly working on ways to make the process of analyzing DNA faster, less costly, and more accurate. Each of those elements can be factors in the outcome of a trial.RFLP TESTINGOne method of DNA analysis used by law enforcement is restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). The RFLP method of DNA testing is a time-consuming and expensive method of DNA testing. It's become a bit outdated but is still used.RFLP is used for the identification criminal suspects and for paternity testing. Forensic scientists use RFLP analysis to examine evidence samples for the presence or absence of DNA sequences. The test separates the sites by a technique called gel electrophoresis. A scientist mixes a solution, which later hardens into a clear gelatin-like substance. Once it's thoroughly mixed, the scientist pours the gel solution into a heat-resistant glass dish where it's allowed to set into a slab of gel (slab gel testing), usually overnight.The next day, the technician injects radioactive-based DNA into the gel and applies an electrical charge to the entire blend. The electricity causes the DNA to move, breaking it apart. The smaller, lighter pieces move farther away from the source of electricity, leaving the larger, heaviest pieces behind.An X-ray film is placed over the gel and photographed. The radioactive bases produce a picture called an autorad, which depicts the image of the classic DNA bar code, a person's DNA fingerprint. The autorad image is eventually used by prosecutors as evidence in court proceedings.RFLP testing requires very large amounts of DNA, about 100,000 cells, or a drop of blood approximately the size of a dime. Crime scene evidence collection methods are often less than satisfactory for gathering completely non-contaminated samples, and samples that have been introduced to things such as mold and dirt won't test adequately using RFLP.PCR AMPLIFICATIONTo analyze a piece of evidence, scientists must first extract DNA from the item, and because DNA's so tiny, they then must divide that piece of DNA into several exact copies to ensure there's enough material on hand for testing. To make copies of DNA, scientists perform a procedure called polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification.PCR amplification is used to amplify, or increase, the number of available samples of DNA. Using PCR amplification, technicians can duplicate millions of copies of a piece of DNA, which allows deteriorated samples to be salvaged and tested.Scientists begin the PCR amplification process by heating a sample of DNA and then pulling it apart. During this initial process a synthetic primer (a short, artificial strand of DNA) binds to the DNA and begins to duplicate it. In the final step, technicians apply heat to the sample, which activates an enzyme to produce an identical copy of the original DNA strand. This procedure can be performed repeatedly, creating billions of perfect copies.There can, however, be a problem with cross-contamination using PCR amplification. There's so much scientist-to-DNA-to-equipment contact that it's imperative the technician wear protective gear such as gloves. To further alleviate the risks of cross-contamination, all tools and instruments must be sterile.ELECTROPHEROGRAMSlab gel testing for DNA — used in the old RFLP testing — has been all but replaced in modern laboratories by machines. One of those machines, the ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer, was developed by the Foster City, California-based company Applied Biosystems.According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, the ABI Prism 310 is one of the most widely used types of equipment for DNA testing in the United States. Its popularity is followed by another of Applied Biosystems' analyzers, the ABI 377. A third favorite is Hitachi's FMBIO.Each of these machines, or analyzers, uses a set of genetic probes, such as the Profiler Plus probes, which examine ten DNA loci. COfiler, another brand of software probes, examines fourteen DNA loci. Alleles, the small sections of DNA on the human genome, are detected by the probes during DNA testing. During the tests, the computer software assigns each allele a number at each locus. Each locus usually has two alleles, one inherited from the mother and one from the father.An electropherogram is a graph depicting peaks that correspond to the amount of DNA that passes through the analyzer. To produce an electrophe-rogram, a forensic scientist or technician places a DNA sample into a small well in the analyzer. The rest of the process is fully automated. The technician switches on the analyzer and the process begins.Just as is needed in the manual tests, the DNA must be amplified (replicated), so the machine uses primers and the PCR amplification method of replication to duplicate DNA segments. For identification purposes, the loci are separately dyed blue, yellow, or green. (The loci will then show up as colored peaks on paper.)Electric current separates the DNA and sends it through a narrow, straw-like capillary tube. As with the slab gel tests, the shorter, lighter portions of DNA move through the tube at a much quicker pace than the longer, heavier fragments. A laser light causes the colored loci to fluoresce as they pass by, which allows a computer-operated camera to capture their images. The images show up as peaks on the electropherogram.The height of the peak, which is measured by reflective fluorescent units (RFUs), depicts the amount of DNA at that particular location. A noticeable difference in the heights of peaks in any given sample indicates the possibility of a second suspect — a mixed sample.Peak height differences indicate a possible mixture of two people's DNA.A degraded sample of DNA evidence can show up as gradually declining peak heights across the electropherogram. If the peaks get short enough (caused by badly degraded samples), they can easily be interpreted as “noise.” They may also be disregarded as a low peak.Diminishing peaks caused by a degraded sample.Spurious PeaksSpurious peaks are peaks that show up on the electropherogram but aren't an actual allele. These false peaks are generally caused by a side effect of the testing process itself. They can be caused by the amplification of the DNA — stutter peaks — or from sample degradation, urea crystals in the sample, or tiny air bubbles in the samples. These pollutants cause small “noise” peaks that occur all along the baseline of the electropherogram. Once in a while, one of these impurities can cause the laser to create a large enough flash that it records nearly as large as a true peak. These peaks can be wrongly interpreted by scientists.A pull-up is simply a glitch in the computer software that causes the machine to misread the dye colors, which in turn can cause the technician to misread the results of the test.Spiked peaks can be caused by voltage surges in the laboratory's power supply, such as a sudden lightning storm.Blobs occur when the colored dyes somehow become separated from the DNA. When that dye passes by the laser, the analyzer records it as an allele. Blobs are normally depicted as really wide peaks and are obvious to experts; however, an inexperienced scientist might interpret the blob as a true peak.Short peaks are, as their name suggests, peaks that are shorter in height than those normally found during the testing process. Oddly enough, there's no standard “low” threshold for scoring alleles. If a sample has been even slightly degraded, it can show up during the testing, but it may only show up as a small (short) peak. Some experts may simply disregard these low peaks as “noise” or as a stutter peak when in actuality they could be dismissing the most important piece of evidence in the entire case. Some labs even set their software to ignore or even disregard these short peaks. The ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer in combination with the Profiler Plus probes uses thresholds as low as 40 RFU. Other labs that don't use the same standard may not count the same peaks and could result in an entirely different interpretation of the same test results.Odd peaks caused by “noise.”Sample MixturesSince DNA testing can now be conducted with very small samples, it's become even easier to obtain a suspect's DNA that's been mixed with more than one other person. DNA is being retrieved from places as small a light switch and even from single fingerprints. There's probably enough of your DNA on the cover and pages of this book to collect as a sample, but think about how many people have touched this book, the light switch, or the very spot from where the fingerprint was lifted. A mixture of your DNA with the DNA of a total stranger — perhaps even a serial killer — is very possible, even probable.An evidence sample that contains DNA from more than one source is very difficult to interpret. A person should, at best, contribute only two identifying markers at each locus. More than two peaks at any given locus indicate the contribution of DNA by more than one person. Some laboratories attempt to distinguish the difference in the peaks by stating that one suspect has a higher peak than the other, in other words, saying that the two individuals are distinguishable. It's not that easy. There can be other causes of additional peaks.Mixed sample showing multiple peaks.MITOCHONDRIAL DNA TESTINGAnother method of testing is mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) analysis, which can be used to connect a suspect with his crime. Each person can be traced to his mother through mtDNA analysis, which looks only at the X (female) chromosomes. DNA samples can be obtained from human remains and compared to other people for possible maternal matches. The bodies of Laci and Conner Peterson (the wife and unborn child of convicted murderer Scott Peterson) were both identified by matching their DNA to the DNA of Laci's mother using mtDNA analysis.Mitochondria are found within cells and are used by the cells as a source of energy. MtDNA is inherited only from the mother, who passes it on to her offspring. MtDNA testing can be used on areas of the body where there's little DNA available, such as hair, bone, and teeth; this testing is also useful if samples have degraded. Detectives find mtDNA analysis particularly useful when a case has remained unsolved or “on the shelf” for many years. It's also helpful when the only evidence is a body part, such as a leg, arm, or even a single fingertip. DNA extracted from the tissue of those limbs can be tested and linked to family members of the victim. There are very few mtDNA testing sites available, which can delay the examination of evidence. This type of DNA testing is quite expensive.STR TESTINGThe method used most commonly in current law enforcement is short tandem repeat (STR) analysis. STR testing is based upon the repetition of alleles (remember the TTAC, TTAC, TTAC pattern) on any given suspect sample. That consecutive repetition sets apart one person's genetic mapping from another (each person has her own individual repetitive pattern).To clarify the difference between PCR amplification and STR testing, PCR amplification is like running DNA through a copy machine, which duplicates the sample as many times as needed. STR testing doesn't duplicate a sample; it's used to identify someone by isolating a particular pattern of alleles.Any variance of a person's normal pattern of alleles indicates the presence or a mixture of a second person's DNA — a difficult sample for scientists to interpret.STRs can even be performed on degraded samples because the amount of DNA needed to conduct the analysis is small compared to the dime-sized drop of blood needed for the RFLP analysis.CODISSTR results can be entered into the Combined DNA Index System (CODIS), the database of DNA profiles comprised of samples taken from crime scenes and individuals convicted of certain crimes, such as sex crimes and other violent crimes. CODIS is operated by the FBI and is available to all levels of law enforcement — local, state, and federal.Technicians and scientists working in law enforcement labs enter DNA profiles into the CODIS database from crime scenes and from offenders who have been arrested for sexual (rape and sexual assault) and other violent crimes, such as homicide. Some states even collect DNA samples from people who have been convicted of other felonies. CODIS searches its database and returns positive results to the submitting agency.The FBI started CODIS in the early 1990s as a pilot program and began full-swing operation in 1998. Software, training, and installation are provided free of charge to any law enforcement agency that is equipped for DNA testing. Today, the DNA profiles of approximately three million felons are on file in the CODIS system.FAMILIAL SEARCHES AND CODISA current and quite controversial means of DNA sampling is called a familial search. Law enforcement officials use familial searches to locate offenders by tracking the DNA of family members. For example, let's say a rape occurs and police enter DNA from the semen sample into the CODIS system. CODIS returns information about someone in prison whose DNA closely, but not exactly, matches the rape suspect's DNA. Through further investigation, police learn that the DNA of a family member of the prisoner is an identical match to the DNA from the rape suspect. Police are presently able to conduct these familial CODIS searches without search warrants.DNA AND THE PROSECUTIONDNA evidence can provide detectives with scientific proof of physical contact between an assailant and a victim. Likewise, DNA tests can also be used to eliminate a person as a suspect or, in some cases, to link several crime scenes to the same perpetrator.DNA is an excellent tool for the prosecution, if it's used correctly. Attorneys who rely on DNA as a sole means for prosecution just may find themselves hearing the words, “not guilty.” They also may find a case they win overturned later on appeal. Criminal cases must be built on the totality of all the circumstances that surround a criminal act, not on DNA alone. In other words, the more truly credible evidence that's presented to tie a suspect to a crime, the better.Just because someone's DNA is found at a crime scene, or even on or in the body of a victim, doesn't mean that person committed the crime. The location of DNA can, however, help prosecutors figure out the chain of events surrounding a murder. A combination of DNA evidence from a victim and another person found in places other than where the victim's body was discovered can suggest a struggle between those two people at that location.A combination of incriminating evidence offers the best case against a suspect. For example, a perpetrator's DNA found in the home of a rape victim along with the discovery of burglary tools and restraints (rope, handcuffs, and duct tape) in the suspect's vehicle is much more powerful than either of the two circumstances alone.For a prosecutor to be sure his case is solid, he must be certain that DNA evidence has been preserved properly and hasn't been contaminated. The attorney must also be able to convince a judge and/or a jury that the collection and testing procedures are sound. He must prove that the DNA evidence he's presenting does indeed implicate the suspect on trial, without any doubt whatsoever.The use of DNA technology is rapidly closing the gap between unsolved crimes and closed cases. As proficiency in testing increases, cases will be solved more rapidly, allowing police detectives much-needed time to work on other cases.DNA AND THE DEFENSEThere are two sides to the DNA coin, and when tossed, it doesn't always land heads up. More and more cases are being overturned based upon improper or nonexistent DNA evidence, and more and more prisoners are being released from prisons all across the country as a result.In the past, defense attorneys have seemingly just accepted DNA evidence as pure and undisputable fact, but research today by firms such as Forensic Bioinformatic Services, Inc. (FBS) of Fairborn, Ohio, have discovered that what was once thought of as the perfect law enforcement tool isn't quite so perfect. FBS scientists are some of the world's leading experts on DNA and are quite often found testifying as expert witnesses in very high-profile cases, such as the Alejandro Avila murder case (victim: five-year-old Samantha Runnion); the O.J. Simpson murder trial (victims: Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman); the Dr. Dirk Greineder murder trial (victim: Mabel Greineder); the case of Lee Boyd Malvo, one of the D.C. snipers (multiple victims); the case of the Green River Killer (multiple victims); and the Monica Lewinsky “blue dress” case.FBS founder Dr. Dan Krane suggests that defense attorneys should follow a simple formula for presenting arguments on behalf of their clients. Following a simple three-tiered, inverted pyramid formula could mean the difference between life and death for a defendant.The major obstacle for presenting a strong defense is the cost of that defense. DNA testing is expensive, but not as costly as paying for the time and knowledge of expert witnesses. Offenders who are indigent and have had attorneys appointed for them by the court simply don't have the means to pay for private investigators and DNA experts.A simple day's testimony from an expert witness can cost approximately three thousand dollars plus travel and lodging expenses. Additional time — further testimony or testing interpretation — can be billed at fifty to three hundred dollars per hour, depending on the expert. Needless to say, the more test results and samples, the more time is needed by the experts and the attorneys. Sometimes experts offer their services pro bono (without charge), especially if the case is a high-profile case where worldwide exposure for their companies can be achieved.Defense attorneys have the task of presenting evidence that exonerates their clients or, at the very least, instills reasonable doubt about their clients' guilt into the minds of jury members. Attorneys for the defense can make use of sources of uncertainty in DNA testing and DNA test results.INTERESTING DNA FACTSAll plants and animals have DNA.Humans have 46 chromosomes; carp have 104.Human and mouse DNA are nearly identical.A person's blood type can change after he receives a bone marrow transplant. DNA in blood cells also change, but saliva and other areas remain the same.The total length of human DNA is thirty-nine inches. The total length of corn DNA is sixty-seven inches.Ultraviolet light and chemicals can damage DNA. These changes are called mutations.
