---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0013.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["murder", "crime", "scene", "officer", "detective", "person", "killing", "homicide", "death", "police", "victim", "killer", "case", "one", "considered", "occurs", "someone", "even", "must", "time", "investigator", "people", "kill", "charge", "another"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0013html

---


6
6HOMICIDE, MURDER, AND MANSLAUGHTERMurder: a life extinguished, mid-sentence. It's a police officer's job to work the crime scene, pursue the truth, and respect the dead; a writer would do well to treat his own scenes with as much consideration — a little less CSI, a lot more compassion. After all, cops and writers share the same goal: to find the best way to finish the victim's sentence.— THERESA SCHWEGEL, EDGAR AWARD-WINNING CRIME-FICTION AUTHOR OF OFFICER DOWN, PROBABLE CAUSE, AND PERSON OF INTERESTWe are a society that's obsessed with death. Scores of movies, TV shows, and books are written with murder as their point of interest. People are fascinated with how, why, and when killers commit their crimes. Entire families structure their evenings around reality police shows. During the day, we tune our sets to coverage of the real-time murder trials of the rich and famous. Newscasters describe overnight slayings while we eat our breakfast and drink our coffee. And in the evenings, we watch procedural crime dramas play out on prime time.We can't seem to pass by an automobile crash without slowing down to look for blood and amputated body parts. Our kids play video games in which the object is to kill as many people as they possibly can in one sitting.We watch it, we read it, and we dream it, and a lot of people still get it wrong — murder and homicide aren't the same. All murders are homicides, but not all homicides are murders.CRIMES INVOLVING DEATHTaking the life of a human being is considered taboo in most cultures. When a killing occurs, it's normally left to the courts to decide the fate of the killer. To do so, judges and juries must first examine the circumstances surrounding the death.Murders are like snowflakes — no two are exactly the same. The facts surrounding each case must be thoroughly scrutinized by authorities before they can decide what charges may apply. There are several criminal categories involving death, and each category is accompanied by its own individual criminal charge. Once the crime has been assigned to an appropriate category, authorities can proceed with issuing warrants that correspond to the crime.The categories of criminal death are (charges may vary in some courts):capital murderfirst-degree murdersecond-degree murderthird-degree murdermanslaughterTo better understand how police and the courts decide which charges apply to a killing, one must understand the meaning of the term homicide.Homicide, simply put, is the killing of one human being by another. Homicide is not always considered a crime, as in the case of self-defense or in the instance of a police officer who uses deadly force to defend himself or someone else. These instances are considered justifiable homicides.When killings aren't justifiable, they're considered illegal and are classified as murder. The crime of murder is a felony that some people believe to be the ultimate crime. The absence or presence of malice is the determining factor as to whether a homicide is deemed a murder.A death that results from negligence, such as a death resulting from a traffic accident, is considered illegal homicide, but it's not necessarily murder. Any killing that occurs during the course of robbery, rape, or burglary is also an illegal homicide, and the killer is normally charged with murder. As always, the burden of proof to provide evidence that the act wasn't criminal lies solely on the accused, although in some cases, the evidence shows beyond a shadow of doubt that the killing was in self-defense, the defense of others, or an accident.Punishment for murder is based upon the level, or degree, of murder for which the defendant is convicted. The distinctions between the different classes of murder are based on the circumstances in which the crime was committed. The most severe class of murder is capital murder, in which a guilty verdict for certain offenses, or a combination of offenses, demands a punishment of life in prison without the possibility of parole, or death.Let's take a closer look at each type of murder charge.CAPITAL MURDERMost states require that, before a person can be charged, tried, and convicted of capital murder, he must have committed one or more of the following offenses:Premeditated and planned the killing of a person, or willfully and deliberately killed a person during the course of an abduction, rape, armed robbery, attempted armed robbery, sodomy, attempted rape, or murder for hire.Premeditated the killing of an officer, or willfully and deliberately killed a law enforcement officer during the performance of his duties when that killing was for the purpose of interfering with his official duties as a law enforcement officer.Premeditatedly, willfully, and deliberately killed a corrections officer while incarcerated as a prisoner in a jail or prison.Premeditatedly, willfully, and deliberately killed more than one person during the commission of one crime or crime spree.Premeditatedly, willfully, and deliberately killed a person during the course of an illegal narcotics transaction, when that killing was for the purpose of continuing that crime or drug transaction.Premeditatedly, willfully, and deliberately killed a child under the age of twelve, when that killing was part of an abduction or part of an attempted abduction.Note the use of the terms premeditatedly, willfully, and deliberately in each of the above capital murder offenses. A murder that's committed with the absence of willfulness, deliberateness, and premeditation can't be considered capital murder. In other words, to be convicted of capital murder, the killer must have shown forethought, planning, and intent to commit one of the above listed offenses.Forethought can be something as simple as looking at Web sites, such as when convicted murderer Scott Peterson used his computer to research tide patterns in the San Francisco Bay. That bit of research indicated that he may have been planning to dispose of his wife's body in those waters.FIRST- AND SECOND-DEGREE MURDERThe law normally specifies two classes of murder other than capital murder — first-and second-degree murder, although some states have a provision for third-degree murder, which applies to the indirect and unintentional killing of someone, such as a drug dealer who supplies drugs to an overdose victim. (Contact your local clerk of court, prosecutor, or police department to learn of specific charges for your area).First-degree murder involves a killing during the commission of lying in wait, holding someone against her will, poisoning, or starving, or during the acts of robbery, inanimate-object sexual penetration, forcible sodomy, burglary, or abduction.All other murders are considered second-degree murders. Second-degree murder is a murder committed due to the reckless indifference for human life, such as in the case of a death resulting from an accident where the driver of the car who initiated the accident was intoxicated.The charge of second-degree murder can vary in some states, and, interestingly, some states consider all murders to be second-degree murders until the state (prosecution) proves that aggravating factors are present. Only after that proof is presented does the charge elevate to first-degree or capital murder. In most states, the act of illegal homicide is always considered second-degree murder.MANSLAUGHTERAlthough not all homicides are illegal, such as in the case of self-defense or the defense of others, those that are committed outside the law are considered felonies (crimes punishable by one or more years in a state or federal prison). Any homicide that occurs accidentally, but occurs during the commission of another crime, is considered to be illegal.Manslaughter is a criminal homicide that's without deliberation, malice, or premeditation but that has occurred during a reckless, careless, or otherwise unforgivable act of irrational behavior. It's a killing in which no excuse can describe or explain away the actions of the accused.Voluntary manslaughter occurs most often during the heat of the moment, such as during a scuffle when one person kills another accidentally as a result of the fight.Involuntary manslaughter occurs when someone kills another while committing an unlawful act without intending any bodily harm to another other person. The homicide is an accident, such as during a fatal automobile accident.MURDER METHODSThere are different means of committing murder. Not all murders involve the victim and the killer being at the same place at the same time, but all murders are the result of a person's indirect or direct action. A murder by direct action occurs when a killer, by his own hand, causes the death of a victim by using a weapon or his own bare hands.An indirect murder is usually the result of a scheme or convoluted plot to kill someone — a plot where the murderer causes a person's death either by the hand of a third party, by using a method like poisoning, or by staging an accident in which the victim dies. Some would-be killers have even used scare tactics in attempts to cause their victims to suffer a heart attack.Killers have used an array of far-out schemes to stop a heartbeat, such as taking advantage of their victim's phobias. Desperate criminals have attempted murder by placing claustrophobic victims in close, tight areas. People who are arachnophobic (afraid of spiders) or ophidiophobic (afraid of snakes) have been forced to be in close proximity to spiders and snakes. Killers have even tossed live reptiles onto their victims. Would-be murderers have dressed up as clowns to frighten those who are coulrophobic (afraid of clowns), and they've even tried to kill by shutting someone in total darkness who suffers from achluophobia (the fear of darkness). These methods are rarely successful, but they're occasionally attempted.The most common types of murder include:Crime of passion: occurs suddenly and in the heat of the moment when anger is provoked by an act, actions, or words. The killer is often someone whom friends and family would never think of as a criminal, and whom they'd definitely never consider capable of murder. Crimes of passion often involve infidelity, financial troubles, and/or bad business deals. Crimes of passion are normally direct murders.Murder for hire: a crime that involves two or more parties who engage in a business transaction in which one person hires another to kill a third person. The reasons a person hires someone else to do his dirty work vary. Either the instigator doesn't have the nerve to do the deed himself or he wants the trail of evidence to point away from himself. Hiring a third party to kill allows him to establish an alibi. These alibis are often so airtight that it's difficult for investigators to prove the suspect had any involvement with the crime. As always, though, when more than one person is involved in the commission of a crime, that crime becomes easier to solve as time passes. Detectives and criminals alike share a saying: The only way two people can safely share a secret is for one to kill the other. A murder for hire can be either a direct or indirect murder.Poisoning: normally an indirect method of killing. Although the killer usually feeds the victim her lethal dosage by placing a toxic substance in her food or drink, a murderer may sometimes inject his victim with an overdose of legal or illegal drugs. An injection of this type deems the murder a direct homicide.False or staged accidents: another indirect method of killing. The killer is usually not around when her victim succumbs to the effects of faulty automobile brakes or a partially sawn rung on a ladder.Implied malice or extreme neglect: occurs when someone does something so hurtful to another person that the act alone would shock a normal person, such as feeding harmful substances to a helpless infant or violently shaking an infant until death results. Killings that fall into this category can be either direct or indirect.Irresistible impulse: when the killer knows what he's doing is wrong but feels the uncontrollable need to commit the act regardless of the consequences. The killer seems to have no mental control of his actions. This killer normally relies on a defense of insanity or diminished mental capacity at the time he committed the crime. An irresistible impulse can be carried out directly or indirectly.Murder while under duress: occurs when someone feels that legitimate threats of death or physical harm have been made against himself or members of his family, such as the case in which a child has been abducted and the kidnappers tell the father he must kill someone in exchange for the release of the child. This type of murder can be direct or indirect.Lynching: an act of violence by a group of people that can be described as a mob, which results in the death of a particular individual. Lynching is a felony and is considered a direct murder.INVESTIGATING MURDERMurder investigations are conducted much like any other investigation — the crime occurs, the police respond, investigators process the scene and collect the evidence, and then the real work begins. It's often said on television, and even in some real police departments, that a murder must be solved within the first forty-eight hours after its occurrence or the chances of it being solved are reduced to almost zero.This is partially true, but not always. First of all, the forty-eight-hour rule can apply to any situation in which humans are involved. People have a tendency to forget things as time passes. They also have a tendency to allow their imaginations, families, friends, and co-workers to get in the way of their recollections. Sometimes even a person's own fears can skew her memories.The best possible time for detectives to interview a witness to a crime is immediately after the offense has occurred, while the events are still fresh in the witness's mind. At this point he hasn't had time to let nature take its course and let doubt overtake fact. Maybe he was tall, or wait, maybe he really wasn't. Could he have had a beard, or was it just a moustache? Red hair or blonde? Caucasian, Hispanic, African-American, or maybe Asian? The first description of a suspect by a witness is usually the best description.As time passes, witnesses also have a tendency to back off from being involved in the situation. Sometimes the perpetrator may have even contacted the witnesses and warned them against speaking to police about the case.Evidence from the crime scene itself can grow stale, old, or even be misplaced or accidentally destroyed if too much time elapses. There's no better time for an investigator to begin her detective work than when the case is hot. Even investigators can become can bored with a case if the excitement of the moment wanes and they don't make any progress.Pride sometimes plays a large part in a detective's decision to slow his work on a case that's not showing signs of progress. Efficiency statistics can be a very important part of a police officer's record, and those same statistics can be a factor in promotions and raises. A detective with a poor crime-solving record and low arrest numbers may soon find himself back in uniform patrolling a high-crime area on the midnight shift. Unsolved cases can reflect poorly on detectives. This can cause a case to be written off as unsolved or cold so the detective can move on to a case that's fresher or more active — and possibly easier to solve.Some departments have special divisions or task forces dedicated to solving unsolved, or cold, cases. These investigators don't have to worry about case clearance rates or other statistics, so they can devote all their attention to a single case.TV shows such as CSI: Crime Scene Investigation depict crime scene detectives and investigators in the best possible light. Unlike real-life detectives, the TV homicide cops always dress impeccably and have the finest tools of the trade available to them at all times. Their highly complex crimes are solved within sixty minutes, minus commercial breaks — forty minutes with TiVo. In reality, nothing can be further from the truth.A murder scene, like any crime scene, is secured by the first officers to arrive. Detectives and, if available, crime scene technicians are called to gather evidence. In many cases police departments don't have specialized crime scene investigators or technicians. Crime scene investigators are normally police detectives. Crime scene technicians are normally civilian employees who have received specialized training in the field of evidence collection.The two best tools a detective has in his arsenal are a good pair of shoes and the gift of gab. The detective must be willing to get out, walk door-to-door, through alleys, up and down streets, through the projects, and through high-class neighborhoods, all while walking the walk and talking the talk of everyone he meets. The detective must constantly ask question after question after question. Most crimes are solved this way. Physical evidence, such as hair, DNA, and fingerprints are all icing on the cake.DESCRIBING THE HOMICIDE SCENEThere are no textbooks or instruction manuals that can accurately describe to you, the writer, what stimulates you or your readers' senses. Books can't bring forth real smells and sounds, and they can't activate a person's taste buds. Words can, however, bring forth memories, and those memories force our brains to associate words with familiar sights, sounds, and tastes. It's the writer's job to use the proper adjectives that best arouse a reader's senses.A description of the dew-dampened petals of a wildflower may rekindle the memory of the rainy day when a thoughtful husband sent his wife a dozen roses for no reason at all other than to offer a gesture of love. Words describing the pops, flashes, and bangs of Fourth of July fireworks may renew a police officer's memories of the sounds heard during a shootout with an armed robber. Officers must write their reports without the words that so vividly animate sentences; they aren't even allowed to describe obvious things, like blood and tissue.There's a distinct difference between the way a writer describes a murder scene and the way that police officers are trained to record the same picture. A police officer's job is to document the facts and then use those facts to solve crimes. Prosecutors use those facts to convict the perpetrators of crimes. Only after an examination by a trained professional working in a laboratory can a substance discovered at a crime scene be positively labeled as blood, saliva, or semen.The following sample narrative report by a police officer is an example of how an officer might write his official account of a homicide case.On August 25, 2004, at 1604 hours my partner, Detective Ben There, and I were dispatched to 1234 Grave Street, Anytown, USA, a dead-end street. Upon arrival I met with Officer W.A. Happened, the first officer on the scene, who told me that an apparent homicide had occurred inside the master bedroom of the residence. He thought the murder weapon could possibly have been an ax. Officer Happened also advised me that he had sealed the perimeter of the entire scene with crime scene tape and had called the coroner and emergency medical personnel. He further stated that he had posted Officer J. Smiley at the rear door of the house to maintain the crime scene log book.At 1617 hours, Officer Happened relinquished control of the scene to me, Detective I.N. Charge. Detective There and I approached the crime scene from the rear door of the residence, where Officer Smiley was stationed. He had each of us sign the log before entering the house.The body of a female was found lying supine on the master bedroom floor surrounded by a liquid substance which was brownish red in color. Dr. Idun Feelsogood, county coroner, stated the victim was indeed deceased and had died of what appeared to be several wounds inflicted by a large edged weapon. The doctor stated that an autopsy would be performed to determine the actual cause of death. There were no people present at the house other than law enforcement and medical personnel. The coroner's investigators placed the victim into a body bag and then transported it to the morgue. Dr. Feelsogood advised me that he would contact the family.The scene was cleared and released at 2007 hours.Detective I.N. Charge Badge number 153Writers use words not only to deliver facts but to provoke a reader's senses. The paragraphs below describe the same murder scene as the officer's report above, but using words that energize a reader's sensations. This scene is real, and many years later I can still taste, touch, feel, hear, and smell the murder in my mind.The first officer on the scene said the killer had used an old ax with a rough oak handle — the kind that would leave splinters in your hand if you didn't wear gloves. I'd already noticed a chop-marked stump next to a small mountain of split, red oak. The ax that had made those cuts wasn't anywhere in sight.The victim's house, a run-down Victorian, with its cracked windows, peeling paint, torn shingles, and general gloom and despair, gave me the creeps. When I was a kid, I'd have thought the place was haunted.My partner and I stepped onto a back porch that had once been screened-in. The screens were gone, and all that was left in their place were a few tattered corners of the rusted, woven-metal mesh. The wood that had once held the screens in place had rotted long ago and succumbed to insects, termites I supposed. A white garbage bag sat next to the door. Some sort of liquid had escaped the bag and left a sticky-looking, wet trail across the painted floor where it disappeared beneath a lopsided washing machine.We were met at the door to the kitchen by a uniformed officer. He handed me a clipboard that held the sign-in sheet — a page torn from a spiral-bound notebook. I scribbled my initials and badge number on the second hand-drawn line; the only name before mine was the coroner's.Inside, the first two rooms appeared normal. Thick candles scented with something tropical — coconut and mango maybe — sat burning on the tiled countertop; soft, light jazz spilled from a portable radio. A faint hint of spoiled milk struck my nose as we passed the sink. Two dirty glasses. A trace of cola in the bottoms.A ceiling fan twirled slowly, slightly off balance. It clicked softly with each oblong rotation. Its light, spring-like breeze didn't match what we found in the next room.The body lay on a hardwood floor — whitewashed oak. Her eyes were open and seemed to look through me. It felt as if her gaze paused briefly at the core of my very soul, as if attempting to see my innermost thoughts, before moving on into infinity. I had to look away.Puddles of blood (don't step in the blood puddles was a thought that kept swirling through my mind) had begun to dry and were the consistency of warm pudding just as the skin begins to form on top. The color of the syrupy liquid had already transformed from bright red to the brownish red of burnt transmission fluid.The air was filled with the scent of human tissue and blood. It was the stench that we investigators associate with violent death and its ingredients. The scent is that of a butcher shop combined with corroded, green copper. It's an odor that's not quickly forgotten.Even though I knew she was dead — hacked to death with an ax — I placed a gloved finger on the dead woman's throat where her pulse should have been. Her cool flesh was like firm Jell-O.The coroner's attendants waited until I stood, and then they loaded the body — that's what she was now, just a body — onto a gurney.I turned to the task at hand. It was my job to find her killer.A death scene, such as the one described in the paragraphs above, is a sensory mix of sentiments that lay heavily on one's mind. The mingled odors can be tasted when you inhale, and that scent clings fiercely to the taste buds. Sometimes forever.The taste and smell sensations of a murder scene can be closely mimicked by touching your tongue to a penny and holding it there for a second or two to allow the taste to firmly embed itself in your mind. Then, with that tang fresh on your tongue, open a package of “reduced for quick sale” hamburger and draw a long whiff deep into your lungs. That's the combination. That's the taste and smell of murder. Sometimes you can detect a faint whiff of burnt gunpowder wafting through a death scene, even hours after the killing has taken place.The silence at murder scenes is sometimes overwhelming for detectives as they scour through evidence while looking for clues. It's not unusual for even the most experienced detectives to hear their own hearts beating. Talking among the detectives is often reduced to whispering — the whir and flash of cameras are amplified.Death itself is quite loud. It's heavy, and it smothers the living with unanswered questions. Homicide detectives are often asked how they deal with the day-in and day-out carnage. Their responses are usually similar in nature — they leave their work at work. They don't talk about it. Instead, each detective deals with the situation in her own way.Some go home after work and put on running clothes and headphones and go out for a jog; others engage in hobbies, lift weights, cook, garden, or bowl. Sadly, some turn to drinking and drug use to relieve their minds of the stress that's associated with their jobs. Those who can handle it do, and they return to face it yet again another day.
