---

author: ["Lee Lofland"]
title: "Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers - part0023_split_001.html"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Lee Lofland - Howdunit Book of Police Procedure and Investigation A Guide for Writers"
tags: ["police", "officer", "crime", "evidence", "tv", "ohio", "testing", "case", "departmentfact", "television", "scene", "many", "show", "work", "suspect", "see", "springfield", "time", "cop", "department", "forensic", "use", "dna", "weapon", "lab"]
categories: [Cop, Forensic, Reference]
url: /posts/reference/HowdunitBookofPoliceProcedureandInvestigationAGuideforWriters-part0023split001html

---


16
C.S. … I DON't THINK SOThe public pays a high price for embracing — without question — the entertaining fantasies about forensic science presented by most television crime dramas and much of crime fiction. That price includes slowed investigations, violent criminals on the loose, innocent people incarcerated, overcrowded jails, clogged court schedules, ineffective homeland security, and many other problems. This is a failure of public policy, not of television and books. Storytelling has its place, but if we don't ask our legislatures to provide real-life support for forensic science, we're living in a costly fool's paradise.— JAN BURKE, EDGAR AWARD-WINNING AUTHOR OF BONES, BLOODLINES, AND KIDNAPPEDFictional TV shows based on criminal investigations have become all the rage in the past several years. The writers of these shows are charged with the responsibility of entertaining their viewing audience, and — based on the shows' extremely high ratings — they seem to be doing quite well with their assignments. Office watercooler chat is another indicator of the popularity of law enforcement reality/fiction shows.The list of sometimes offensive and inaccurate depictions of how the law enforcement community conducts its day-to-day business grows with each episode of these TV shows. The fallacies not only irritate police officers, scientists, and crime scene technicians, but they wreak havoc in courtrooms all across the country and even into neighboring Canada. These sources of fictional entertainment have created a phenomenon known as the “CSI Effect.” The stars of crime scene investigation shows use forensic testing techniques that would leave Sherlock Holmes in awe. Some techniques used are legitimate, but others couldn't be further from the truth. In some cases, even everyday police procedures are stretched beyond the limits of reality.The TV-viewing public has learned about DNA, fingerprinting, casting, weapons, firearms testing, blood spatter, entrance and exit wounds, insect evidence, hair, fiber and other trace evidence, tire tracks, Luminol, and alternate light sources. Television has taught its audience about autopsies and time of death, how to use sonar to find a dead body in a bay, how a polygraph works, and how psychics use their uncanny powers to find killers.We've seen these approaches to crime solving so often that these methods, tools and techniques, and results are what TV viewers expect from the law enforcement community. And they expect nothing less — why, they've seen a famous TV medical examiner slice and dice her way to a cause of death between ads for dog food and shampoo.As a result of watching television, jurors in criminal trials expect to hear about perfect DNA testing and fingerprint evidence. They expect to hear testimony from supercops and magical crime scene technicians, and they want to hear tales of mystical revelations from a local coroner. Jury members expect a smoking gun in every case. They want slam-dunk evidence.The reality of the situation is that this isn't reality.What is reality is that doctors don't leave emergency rooms to poke around someone's house searching for clues. Crime scene technicians don't normally carry weapons. In fact, most of them aren't even sworn police officers, and they have no authority to arrest anyone. Medical examiners don't engage in physical confrontations with armed suspects, and the few cops who do attend autopsies aren't allowed to prod and dig around a dead body looking for bullets or other pieces of evidence. When the real-life professionals go about their daily routines of crime solving, they turn on the lights in every room, unlike their TV counterparts. Real-life law enforcement people don't work in the dark by flashlight!TV shows and films lead us to believe that there are unlimited funds available for crime solving. Not so. In fact, most forensic laboratories are underfunded, understaffed, and behind schedule in testing the tremendous amount of evidence that's submitted to them each and every day. In fact, many of the facilities where the testing takes place are in poor condition.Many police labs are equipped with hand-me-down equipment, and often the employees themselves purchase a portion of that equipment. Many police officers buy their own fingerprinting tools, weapons, binoculars, and evidence-collection materials because their departments simply don't have the funds allocated in their budgets for anything that's not absolutely necessary.Low pay and a lack of proper equipment can make for less-than-desirable working conditions. Many public employees seek employment with private scientific testing companies, leaving the police labs seriously understaffed and causing a backlog of evidence that needs testing. A backlog of cases can be extremely devastating to the court system. Untested evidence means that cases aren't solved, and unsolved cases mean that criminals are still out on the street committing crimes.In August of 2006, a Jacksonville, Florida, newspaper reported that the crime labs of the Florida Department of Law Enforcement had evidence from approximately one thousand cases on hold, waiting to be examined by forensic scientists. A Maryland newspaper reports that the state police crime lab is understaffed by twelve scientists.The U.S. Department of Justice reported that, in 2005, the state of Tennessee had one of the most backlogged forensic laboratory systems in the country. The same report indicates that a typical crime lab maintains an average of four hundred backlogged cases per month. The U.S. Department of Justice reported that, at the end of 2002, 351 publicly funded U.S. laboratories had a backlog of more than 500,000 requests for evidence examination.Television shows us scientists who work almost exclusively on DNA evidence, firearm comparison, and blood and trace evidence. Actually, scientists and other specialists who work in these laboratories spend only a scant amount of their time examining DNA evidence (which, by the way, normally takes a minimum of three days to examine, not the fifteen or twenty minutes suggested on television). The rest of their time is spent examining other evidence, such as tool marks and narcotics, with narcotics being the most frequently examined piece of evidence in nearly all crime labs.The Los Angles County Sheriff's office operates the largest crime lab in the United States, examining more than 500,000 pieces of evidence annually. Their work is about 70 percent narcotics testing. Evidence testing for homicide and rape cases is performed in another, much smaller, downtown facility. There, scientists conduct testing on evidence such as firearms, fingerprints, and DNA evidence.A backlog in a forensic laboratory slows the entire judicial system. Criminals who are incarcerated while awaiting trial must often remain in jail until the testing of the evidence from their crime scenes is complete. This delay often results in continuances of their trials over and over again. The costs for this wait time can be staggering.Cops and scientists alike know that, in the world of law enforcement, scientific testing, and evidence collection, the procedures are only as good as the people who perform them. Cops and scientists are human. They make mistakes.Dr. Dan Krane, one of the world's leading DNA experts, says this about DNA testing and how it's portrayed on television: “You never see a case where the sample is degraded or the lab work is faulty or the test results don't solve the crime. These things happen all the time in the real world.”Dr. Krane's statement is absolutely correct. Many times DNA test results are returned to detectives as being inconclusive due to improper handling of the evidence, or because the sample wasn't large enough to examine properly, if at all.Thanks to television and the creative minds of writers, courts and police officers are faced with having to overcome the public's perception of how crimes should be solved. It's quickly becoming a difficult uphill battle. Prosecutors are spending almost as much time explaining why little or no evidence will be presented during a trial as they do when they present actual evidence. In fact, The Toronto Sun published a story about a detective who spent over two hours on the witness stand, trying to explain to jurors that absolutely no physical evidence was recovered at a particular crime scene.Actor Robert Blake was arrested in 2002 for the murder of his wife, Bonny Lee Bakley. Blake and his wife had dinner at an Italian restaurant in Studio City, California, and shortly after dinner Bakley was found dead in the couple's car, which was parked around the corner from the restaurant. Blake later told police he'd returned to the restaurant to retrieve a gun that had apparently fallen out of his pocket during dinner.Jurors in Robert Blake's murder trial found Blake not guilty because the prosecution didn't present enough TV-type forensic evidence. One juror stated that she just expected much more evidence. Another felt that Blake couldn't have committed the crime because there was no blood spatter found on him.Blake was later found to be liable for his wife's death by a jury in a civil trial. He was ordered to pay Bakley's children several million dollars in damages. Blake has since filed for bankruptcy.REAL COPS SPEAK ABOUT TV COPSMany people who work in the law enforcement field find it difficult, if not impossible, to watch TV shows where their profession is so grossly misstated. The same holds true with written material. Many police officers find it hard to read a book where the action is nonstop and where crime solving techniques are untrue.Police officers don't talk about their jobs publicly. They're a tightly knit group who pack together like wolves. But if you get a handful of police officers together and ask them about TV cop shows and what they see that's wrong … well, here's what they had to say:“When officers search a building with their weapons drawn, they don't place their fingers inside the trigger guard. They could trip, accidentally discharge the weapon, and kill their own partners.” — Sergeant Timothy Leedy, Hamilton, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: Cops are taught to hold their weapons pointed downward when searching buildings or pursuing criminals. It's easier to find and stay on target when bringing a weapon upward rather than in a downward movement.“You never see the officers on television doing any paperwork, which is a huge part of the job.” — Sergeant John Priest, retired, Springfield, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: Most of a police officer's shift is spent observing, patrolling, talking to people, and completing paperwork. Running, shooting, fighting, and car chases aren't the norm.“To solve crimes within an hour is not reality.” — Crime Prevention Specialist Dave Crawford, Hamilton, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: It can take days, weeks, even months or years to solve a single case. Most detectives work on many cases simultaneously.“It's rare that you ever see a cop on television miss a shot during a gun battle, when in reality it's never that cut and dry.” — Lieutenant David Czyzak, Springfield, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: Tunnel vision, adrenaline, and sheer excitement are all factors involved during a gunfight. Normally, many, many rounds of gunfire are exchanged during a shooting situation, and police officers rarely kill the suspect. In fact, most rounds fired don't hit the intended target.“It drives me crazy when you see a cop on television get into a shootout, and then he immediately goes back to work on the street.”— Lieutenant Jim Hutchins, Springfield, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: Most police departments require that all officers involved in a shooting incident be suspended from normal duty pending an investigation of the incident. The officers are also normally required to receive counseling.“I think it's so unrealistic when the crime scene investigator also makes the arrest, interrogates the suspect, and solves the case. In a department of any size, that doesn't happen.” — Sergeant Nelson T. Smith, retired, Springfield, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: Crime scene investigators are normally not police officers. They're civilian employees with no arrest powers. Detectives are usually the officers who conduct interrogations.“I think it's ridiculous when the cop-hero in a movie gets suspended and then goes out and solves the case on his own, proving he was right all along. In the real world, he'd would probably be fired for doing that.” — Officer Mitch Hurst, Springfield, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: When an officer has been suspended from duty, his police powers may also be temporarily suspended. Some departments ask suspended officers to hand in their weapons and badges during a suspension. An officer on suspension who's acting on his own to solve a crime is susceptible to civil liability.“When police officers get shot or hurt on television, I wish it would be more realistic. They show them running miles and miles after being shot. People need to know that police officers are heroes but aren't invincible.” — Officer Kristy Collins, Hamilton, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: A gunshot wound is traumatic even if it's not life threatening. The psychological impact of being shot is sometimes worse than the gunshot wound itself. officers who have been severely wounded aren't normally capable of physically pursuing their shooters. Police officers are trained to survive and have been known to subdue and restrain their attackers before succumbing to their wounds.“On television, you'll sometimes see a defense attorney sitting in on the interrogation of her client, allowing the detectives to berate the client. I've never seen that happen, and I don't expect I ever will.” — Chief of Police Stephen P. Moody, Springfield, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: Most defense attorneys won't allow their clients to speak with police until some sort of agreement has been reached protecting the defendant from further incriminating himself. The attorneys would never stand for verbal abuse or trickery by the police.“The lead actor shoots three suspects, and then lets the ‘lowly’ uniformed officers arrive shortly after the fact to clean everything up. I guess a routine shift done with proper police procedures won't sell many books or movies.” — Sergeant Danny Palmer, retired, Springfield, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: Normal, routine police work can be pretty boring. TV producers spice things up a bit to capture the attention of their audiences.“My favorite is how the star ‘hounds’ the suspect for several days prior to the arrest. That would never happen!” — Sergeant Gary Wilson, retired, Springfield, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: Most police investigators don't let a suspect know they're conducting an investigation until that investigation is nearing its end. The element of surprise is an essential part of crime solving.“I always comment to my wife how silly it is to see the TV police respond to a relatively minor call with lights and sirens.” — Captain Bruce Sigman, Springfield, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: Police officers only use lights and sirens during emergency situations and during traffic stops. They don't normally arrest someone and leave the scene with lights flashing and sirens wailing unless the suspect is injured and they're taking him to the hospital.“I don't like to see TV detectives physically abuse suspects in an interrogation. The public thinks that's how it's routinely done, and it's not.” — Officer Nick Holt, Springfield, Ohio, Police DepartmentFACT: Most police departments use video and audio taping during interrogations; therefore, any type of abuse would be caught on camera. Police officers receive extensive training regarding the dos and don'ts of when they can and can't use force on a suspect. Interrogation isn't a time when use of force is permitted, unless the suspect becomes violent.Other comments from police officers:“Police officers don't fire warning shots! For goodness' sake, what goes up must come down!”“Police officers don't receive results from crime labs right away. Sometimes it takes weeks to get answers.”“I really hate to see TV cops spouting off the Miranda warnings as soon as they handcuff someone. It's just not done that way.”“TV cops return to a crime scene over and over again to collect evidence. In real life, you usually get one shot at the scene. If we feel that we need more time, we seal the scene and maintain control of it for as long as necessary. But once we leave, that's it. There's no coming back. Besides, if we did come back, we couldn't use the evidence in court (if it was still there) because we lost our chain of custody when we left.”It takes a special person to become a police officer, and when those hometown heroes see themselves portrayed as violent or abusive, and perhaps even dumb, it can sometimes cause animosity. One comment that surfaced repeatedly during the questioning of police officers for this chapter is best summed up by Crime Prevention Specialist officer Dave Crawford of the Hamilton, Ohio, Police Department:I really dislike it when people call us pigs and talk about us eating donuts. When they do call us pigs, I just smile and think about what those letters actually stand for: Pride, Integrity, and Guts. It takes all those qualities to be a good cop.Then again, the letters could also stand for Plain, Iced, and Glazed.
