---

author: ["Benjamin Sobieck"]
title: "The Writers Guide to Weapons A Practical Reference for Using Firearms and Knives in Fiction - N55861"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Benjamin Sobieck - The Writers Guide to Weapons A Practical Reference for Using Firearms and Knives in Fiction"
tags: ["bullet", "ammunition", "cartridge", "target", "caliber", "used", "mean", "said", "maynard", "rifle", "metal", "primer", "firing", "pin", "type", "handgun", "material", "hit", "firearm", "example", "use", "one", "crime", "casing", "would"]
categories: [Cop, Reference, Weapons]
url: /posts/reference/TheWritersGuidetoWeaponsAPracticalReferenceforUsingFirearmsandKnivesinFiction-n55861

---


Rifle and Handgun Ammunition, The Writer's Guide to Weapons
Rifle and Handgun Ammunition
Bullets fired during gunplay can become downright magical in thrillers and crime fiction. From ricocheting into conveniently placed targets to penetrating any material under the sun, they’re like mini-superheroes. In reality, there’s nothing supernatural about them. They’re just pieces of metal flying through the air, and they’re limited by the same physics as a baseball in flight.
Popular rifle and handgun ammunition brands: Federal, Hornady, Remington, Winchester.
Anatomy of rifle and handgun ammunition. (Photo courtesy of Gun Digest.)
Ammunition for rifles and handguns is called shells, rounds, or cartridges. We’ll refer to them as cartridges in this section to be consistent. Some people refer to rifle and handgun ammunition as bullets, but that’s not technically accurate. A bullet only refers to the thing that comes out of the barrel. When you look at an actual unfired cartridge, you’ll notice that the bullet is only the metal projectile seated at the top of the cartridge.
Other parts of the cartridge are the brass casing (the metallic jacket that comprises the lower part of the cartridge), gunpowder, and primer (found inside the casing and hit by the firing pin to ignite the gunpowder). The cartridge itself refers to the entire thing.
Cartridge sizes are specific to the caliber of the firearm. The cartridges cannot be swapped between different kinds of firearms unless the firearm shoots the exact same caliber and size cartridge. Caliber numbers are an expression of width. A .22, for example, means the bullet has a diameter of 22⁄100 of an inch. A .50 caliber fires a bullet that’s a half-inch in diameter. Because of this, larger calibers of ammunition generally inflict more damaging wounds than smaller calibers. A .22 will drill out a third nostril. A .50 will take the head clean off.
Some calibers are developed using the metric system, so they don’t use inches as specified above. In this case, a 9mm’s bullet has a diameter of 9 millimeters. The 10mm’s diameter is 10 millimeters. When researching ammo and firearm calibers, writers might stumble on something like “9 x 19mm.” The first number is the bullet’s width. The second is the length, useful for noting variations within the caliber. It’s still acceptable to write 9mm instead of 9 x 19mm. Just don’t put a period in front, as in .9mm. That’s a common mistake. For length variations within English measurements, there’s usually a word tacked onto the caliber number. For example, a .22 Long Rifle denotes a lengthier version of the .22. A .22 Short is the stubbier version. In either case, it’s appropriate to skip the length information when writing.
No matter the caliber, bullets themselves are measured in grains. The higher the grain, the heavier the bullet. Gunpowder and other ammunition features are also measured in grains. One grain is equivalent to 64.79 milligrams (1⁄7,000 of a pound). One ounce is equal to 437.5 grains. This detail may also be more than you need for your story, but it’s good to know.
Let’s take a second to discuss entry and exit wounds. Entry wounds are smaller than exit wounds. A small, clean hole is made where the bullet enters a target. The bullet will then expand into a mushroom shape (or explode entirely, as with hollow-point bullets, explained later in this chapter). The exit wound will usually be larger and messier, since the jagged mushroom shape is wider than the original bullet.
When researching rifle and handgun ammunition for thrillers and crime fiction, writers will often come across two terms: centerfire and rimfire. It’s helpful to understand a little bit about each.
This photo depicts where the firing pin hit this 9mm primer. It’s obvious this is centerfire ammunition because the firing pin hit the direct center of the primer. If the firing pin had hit the rim, it would be apparent that the ammunition was rimfire. Either way, the mark from the firing pin is like a firearm’s fingerprint. This detail is useful for writing CSI-type scenarios in which a character matches fired ammunition to a particular firearm. (Photo courtesy of Shutterstock.)
Centerfire ammunition means the firing pin (the device integral to the firearm that strikes the primer inside the cartridge and ignites the gunpowder) hits the center of the primer. Centerfire primers are often used with thicker casings and can support greater pressure and therefore greater firepower. In this case, when a character examines the mark left by a firing pin on a spent cartridge, the mark will likely appear in the center of the primer if a more powerful firearm was used. That’s a great way to work in a clue at a crime scene.
Rimfire ammunition means the firing pin strikes the rim of the cartridge’s casing instead of a primer in the center. A thinner casing is used in this case, which means it can support less pressure and therefore less firepower. It’s most often used in such lighter calibers as the .22 and the .17.
Here are some other common terms you may come across in your research and writing:
Magnum. When describing ammunition, thriller and crime fiction writers sometimes use the term magnum. This means the cartridge has extra gunpowder and/or a heavier bullet, and therefore greater firepower. There isn’t an industry standard for what constitutes magnum ammo; it’s up to the manufacturer. If there’s any consistency, it’s that magnum ammo packs more punch than nonmagnum ammo within the same caliber. A .22 magnum cartridge is more powerful than a standard .22 cartridge.
Hollow-point bullets. This means the tip of the bullet is missing by design. Such bullets explode upon impact, breaking into smaller pieces inside the target. For this reason, it is unlikely for a hollow-point bullet to pass through its target. Hollow-point bullets are usually used when collateral damage caused by a bullet passing through a target is a risk. It’s often said the Geneva Conventions banned hollow-point bullets for wartime use because of the increased suffering they can cause. However, the ban actually went through in 1899 at the Hague Peace Conferences. Whether they increase suffering is debatable, since being shot by any ammunition type is typically pretty horrific.
The ban doesn’t prohibit characters from using hollow-point bullets, however. It only applies to state militaries of signatories at war with another state signatory. Although the ban and its implementations changed through the years, it’s best not to outfit military characters with hollow-point ammunition. They’d likely use full metal jacket bullets (explained next) instead. Other characters, from civilians to police officers, are free to use hollow-point bullets when the law does not restrict their use (usually for hunting).
Full metal jacket. This means the lead bullet is coated in metal (usually copper). This design makes it more likely to pass through a target. It’s said this type of ammunition is designed to wound rather than kill, because it doesn’t break apart as it travels through a target. While there is some truth to that, shot placement is the real concern. A full metal jacket bullet to a vital area will still kill a character. This type of bullet has been around since the late nineteenth century.
Armor-piercing ammunition. The mythology of armor-piercing ammunition would have us believe that these bullets are able to penetrate bulletproof vests and other gear. What armor-piercing actually means is pretty vague.
One type of armor-piercing ammunition involves bullets coated in Teflon. The Teflon reduces wear on the barrel, making the bullet able to withstand greater pressures and therefore allowing it more of a punch from the gunpowder. This boost in kinetic energy might be enough to penetrate body armor, such as bulletproof vests. Whether Teflon-coated bullets actually can do so depends on variables such as range, trajectory, environmental conditions, the type of bulletproof vest, and more. In that regard, they’re no different from any other bullet that, under the right conditions, could bust through a bulletproof vest. Armor-piercing is a misnomer.
Because of legal restrictions, Teflon-coated bullets went virtually extinct in the 1990s. It’s unlikely a character from the 1990s onward would use them. Confine their usage to 1960s through 1980s settings.
The other type of armor-piercing ammunition relates to the materials used in the bullet itself. As grade-school science classes (hopefully) made clear, harder materials cut softer materials. A bullet made of something harder than what it’s hitting stands a better chance of penetration. Use a bullet made of hardened steel, among other materials, and it might plow through the materials used to armor buildings, vehicles, and people.
There’s no guarantee, though. Any number of variables, from the thickness of the target material to the range at which the shot is taken, will determine whether the ammunition will actually pierce the armor.
For example, armor-piercing bullets fired from a mile away lose most of their kinetic energy, reducing the chance of deeply penetrating the target. Conversely, standard ammunition (not armor-piercing) fired at a closer range might transfer more kinetic energy into a target, causing penetration.
For these reasons, I don’t recommend using the term armor-piercing when describing bullets or ammunition in a story.
I also don’t recommend using the term cop-killer ammunition. It’s sometimes used as an umbrella term that includes armor-piercing ammunition, but once again the name doesn’t mean anything. All sorts of ammunition are tossed into the “cop-killer” category. Hollow-point ammunition is one, although I’ve never understood the reasoning there. Hollow-point bullets aren’t designed to pass through targets, much less police vests or body armor. Sure, a cop could be killed with hollow-point bullets, but there’s nothing exceptional about that when any bullet could do the same thing. Police officers aren’t like werewolves—a special type of bullet is not necessary to kill them. They’re human beings like anyone else.
So, as with armor-piercing ammunition, I don’t recommend depicting cop-killer ammunition in a story. Some better adjectives for this type of ammunition include high-velocity, magnum, high-powered, and full metal jacket. They’re vague enough to allow for penetration of various materials but still grounded firmly in reality.
Inaccurate Example
Maynard Soloman examined the carnage of the crime scene. He leaned down and inspected an empty bullet, noting a mark on the rim of the brass.
“What do you think?” said Captain Penny Flyswatter from the far side of the room.
“I think this is the work of Bill Robber. He had himself a big ol’ gun, too,” Maynard said, nodding at the fresh corpses. “Bill fired three times. Hollow points.”
“But there are four bodies. How do you figure?” Captain Flyswatter said.
“A shot went through one of the first three, then hit the fourth victim. If I know Bill, he won’t stop at four,” Maynard said and took a bite from his sloppy sub sandwich. “You don’t mind if I have lunch in here, right?”
Accurate Example
Maynard Soloman examined the carnage of the crime scene. He leaned down and inspected an empty casing, noting a mark in the center of the bottom of the brass.
“What do you think?” said Captain Penny Flyswatter from the far side of the room.
“I think this is the work of Bill Robber. He had himself a big ol’ gun, too,” Maynard said, nodding at the fresh corpses. “Bill fired three times. Full metal jackets.”
“But there are four bodies. How do you figure?” Captain Flyswatter said.
“The shot went through one of the first three, then hit the fourth victim. Lucky shot. If I know Bill, he won’t stop at four,” Maynard said and took a bite from his sloppy sub sandwich. “You don’t mind if I have lunch in here, right?”
What Went Wrong?
All sorts of things are suspect in this example.
An “empty bullet” isn’t a thing. A bullet is the projectile. The brass casing is what’s empty and left on the floor.
In the first example, Maynard noted a “mark on the rim of the brass.” That points to rimfire ammunition. As mentioned previously, rimfires are used with light calibers, such as the .17 and .22. That doesn’t sound conducive to the “big ol’ gun” Bill apparently used. Centerfire ammunition would be in line with a “big ol’ gun,” since it’s used for more powerful calibers. Maynard would notice a mark from the firing pin in the center of the primer, as he does in the corrected example.
If hollow-point bullets were used, the likelihood of one passing through a victim and killing another is low. Hollow-point bullets are designed to explode upon impact and not pass through.
Seeing three shots and four bodies led Maynard to make an educated guess that the shooter used full metal jackets in the corrected version. That type of bullet can pass through targets.
Finally, eating a sub sandwich at a crime scene is just a bad idea. It can be forgiven, though, since Maynard is one helluva clueless detective.
A Quick Word About “Self-Guided” Bullets
Rifle and handgun bullets adjusting in midair to hit targets would seem to be the stuff of science fiction. But in 2012, Sandia National Laboratories brought the concept into reality.
Sandia’s projectile uses fins—sort of like a miniature airplane—to change trajectory. Sensors on the nose of the bullet lock in on a separate laser beam focused on a target.
This doesn’t mean the bullet can make hard turns, a la The Fifth Element. Rather the adjustments keep the bullet’s trajectory in check.
An article on Sandia’s website (share.sandia.gov) states, “Computer simulations showed an unguided bullet under real-world conditions could miss a target more than a half mile away (1,000 meters away) by 9.8 yards (9 meters), but a guided bullet would get within 8 inches (0.2 meters), according to the patent.”
How writers choose to embellish this technology is up to them. It’s still helpful to know a scene referencing “self-guided” bullets isn’t so far from reality these days.
