---

author: ["Benjamin Sobieck"]
title: "The Writers Guide to Weapons A Practical Reference for Using Firearms and Knives in Fiction - N55853"
date: "2024-07-19"
description: "Benjamin Sobieck - The Writers Guide to Weapons A Practical Reference for Using Firearms and Knives in Fiction"
tags: ["knife", "firearm", "weapon", "guide", "writer", "story", "maynard", "bill", "get", "gun", "character", "rv", "writing", "crime", "information", "use", "right", "take", "one", "like", "wrong", "around", "start", "offer", "bad"]
categories: [Cop, Reference, Weapons]
url: /posts/reference/TheWritersGuidetoWeaponsAPracticalReferenceforUsingFirearmsandKnivesinFiction-n55853

---


Introduction, The Writer's Guide to Weapons
Introduction
Why Getting It Right Matters
Bill Robber, serial check bouncer, just made off with $330 trillion in two-dollar bills from the freshly burglarized First State Bank, thus recouping his lifelong accrual of overdraft fees. Bill’s sports car displayed an energy drink decal in the rear windshield, indicating to police that pursuit in typical cruisers was out of the question.
Fortunately, Maynard Soloman, gal-damn detective, watched the whole thing unfold across the street. He popped an antacid and hit the gas on his rattrap RV. The engine belched smoky profanity as the speedometer approached 900 miles per hour. The sheer speed lifted the RV off the ground, causing it to take flight high above rush hour traffic.
Once positioned above Bill’s sports car, Maynard gently tapped the brakes. The RV dropped onto Bill’s sports car with a devastating crunch.
“Your scam is finished. No one escapes overdraft fees,” Maynard said to Bill’s mangled figure. “The next bad check you’ll have is the inspection when your carcass gets to prison.”
Chalk up another victory for Maynard Soloman, the world’s crustiest detective.
Other than the slapstick tongue-in-cheekery, does anything seem off about that passage? Like factually wrong?
This example has some pretty obvious problems: No one would write about an RV rocketing down the highway at 900 miles per hour—RVs just don’t do that. Science has also yet to prove that RVs can fly with any degree of accuracy. And outside of an absurdist comedy or maybe science fiction, there’s no way a single person could hold $330 trillion in rainmaking two-dollar bills. That’s if a bank would carry that many twofers in the first place.
But you’re writing more serious fare: thrillers, mysteries, police procedurals, and the like. To a certain degree, sticking to reality matters quite a bit. Yes, it’s true that errors in these genres may not be quite as obvious as those in a passage involving $330 trillion in cash and a flying RV, but shaky clichés, crimes against physics, and mistakes of ignorance still abound in depictions of firearms and knives. Cornea-shattering eye rolls can yank readers out of the story and put the writer’s credibility into serious question.
I’ve read too many otherwise terrific tales tarnished by these grossly inaccurate depictions. In fact, one particular online crime story (which shall remain nameless) got a shotgun so mind-bogglingly wrong that it inspired me to write this guide. And given the number of military veterans, gun owners, knife enthusiasts, outdoors types, and history buffs that make up the readership of the thriller, mystery, and crime genres, it’s a safe bet I’m not the only one who has raised an eyebrow.
However, I’m not here to pass judgment on other writers. I had the good fortune to grow up around firearms and knives. I built a career in publishing firearm and knife magazines and books, working with TV shows, and creating digital content at Gun Digest and BLADE. I sometimes forget that not everyone comes from the same background.
So why should it be a surprise that some stories source their firearm and knife information from popular culture? That’s all the exposure some writers have to these weapons. And that’s where the trouble starts. Pop culture—be it books, movies, video games, or TV shows—does a D+ job at depicting firearms and knives. They use just enough truth to make the rest believable if you don’t know any better.
I don’t hold this bad habit against anyone. Instead of wagging my finger at social media and writing forums, I wrote this guide. That’s Minnesota Nice for you.
What follows is a guide to the firearms and knives commonly used in thrillers and crime fiction. The information is boiled down so writers unfamiliar with these items can quickly learn the ropes. I offer detailed information, but I won’t go all Tom Clancy on you. As such, this guide is by no means an exhaustive look at every firearm, knife, or accessory in existence. It’s a practical reference for writers, not an encyclopedia. To paraphrase the late Elmore Leonard, I tried to leave out all the parts writers skip. Get in, get out, and get back to work.
To help me along the way, I’d like to formally introduce you to Maynard Soloman, gal-damn detective. He’s a crotchety PI from my own writing who cracks cases out of his decaying RV. Maynard agreed to take a few blows as an example character throughout this guide, where I stick him into scenarios that inaccurately depict firearms and knives. Try to spot the errors as Maynard does battle with his moronic arch nemesis, Bill Robber. Then I’ll explain what went wrong and how to fix it. Introduce yourself, Maynard.
“I haven’t had health insurance since ’86. Please be gentle,” Maynard says.
Not to worry, Maynard. There’s an ice pack and a case of beer waiting for you at the end of this book. You’ll be fine. There’s plenty of pain to go around in this guide. Just ask the crime writer who shared his true story of getting shot in Ireland. Or the remains of characters turned to soup by writers using weapons on the Hit List in Part Three. I’ve also included some of the most baffling myths about weapons in fiction and real life, as well as information about the most popular weapons in the thriller, crime, mystery, and war genres. And if the information in this guide piques your interest, you will find even more firearm and knife information in Gun Digest and BLADE. I highly recommend them as the next step in your weaponry education.
Finally, I’d like to say that this guide is a labor of love for me, but don’t take it as dogma. Push the envelope of creative license all you want. My hope is you’ll do so with a better understanding of firearms and knives. Your readers will thank you for it.
Ten Golden Tips for Writing Weapons
Lists of writing rules are just asking to be broken. However, here are my Ten Golden Tips for writing about weapons. These will help you get a footing for the rest of the book.
Don’t overthink firearms and knives. That might sound odd coming from this full-length guide, but it’s true. This guide is written to be a practical, get-in-and-get-out reference. Figure out what you need to know more about, see how it works, throw it into the story, and be done with it. Unless you’re tapping your inner technical writer, just shoot for accurately depicting the weapons in your story. There’s no need to expound every single detail of your master criminal’s choice revolver. Doing so … slowwwws … down … the … story.
Hopelessly lost? Start with what looks cool. This guide includes sections on matching firearms and knives to characters. That will help a great deal if you don’t know what weapon to choose, but if you’re totally lost, search online for images of firearms and knives. Pick a couple that look cool to you. Then check them against this guide. Are they capable of doing what you want them to do? Do they fit the genre, time period, and style of your story?
YouTube is your friend. It’s not always possible to get your mitts on a certain firearm or knife. Fortunately, you can join the vibrant community of reviewers on YouTube for a real-world perspective. Watch their videos on weapons and how they work, and use that information as a base for further research.
If it’s in a movie or on television, it’s probably inaccurate. No one would take legal advice from TV police procedurals. A person (hopefully) wouldn’t attempt surgery after watching a medical drama. It’s the same with firearms and knives in movies and television. Hollywood takes a truckload of creative license, but real firearms and knives must be grounded within the realms of physics, technology, and history. Strive to make your weapons as accurate as possible to retain credibility.
Buy a knife or hit the gun range. Knives are relatively easy to buy. If a character’s knife is central to the story, chances are good that buying it in real life is a possibility (with a few exceptions outlined in this guide). What could be better for writing than having the knife right there? Plus, it’ll look nice next to the keyboard. Firearms are a different story, but hitting the gun range is a great place to start. Many ranges offer gun rentals to shoot on location. If that’s too intimidating or not possible, you can start by taking a gun safety course instead. These courses offer hands-on training from professionals, and most offer a state certificate at the end.
Stuck? Write around the weapon. The old writer’s trick of maneuvering around challenging grammar and sentence structure also applies to weapons. If you can’t determine the exact firearm or knife a character should be outfitted with, avoid it by going generic. Just use knife, pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, and the like. Remember to keep the use of those items equally generic and consistent, or it will become obvious that you don’t know the weapon.
Read a newspaper. There’s no better (or worse) example of how humans use firearms and knives on each other than the crime report. It’s fertile ground for fiction. For example, you could source a weapon for a character based on a real murder. Sure, it’s morbid, but it grounds the item’s use in reality.
Bad guys can get just about anything. The illegal trade of firearms and knives means a criminal can use a firearm manufactured in the Czech Republic to knock off a Chicago liquor store if he has the right connections. Don’t feel limited when outfitting a “bad guy” with unusual firearms and knives. Unlike the legal market, the back alley offers plenty of variety.
But good guys can’t. Professional law enforcement and military organizations have good reasons to standardize their firearms and knives. Firearm selection, especially in the military, is determined through rigorous testing. Ammunition is often purchased in bulk. Certain knives might not physically mesh well with other gear. Tossing some obscure firearm or knife into these characters’ hands doesn’t always make sense. They will require more research to get right. The same goes for everyday, law-abiding civilian characters. Research federal, state, and local laws so they’re not walking around with something ridiculously illegal.
Someone will say you’re wrong, even if you’re right. Put three readers keen on firearms and knives in a room together, and then ask them for an opinion. The only thing two of them will agree on is that the third is wrong. So if an armchair general, a mall ninja, or an everyday Internet troll starts complaining about the inaccuracy of the well-researched Walther .380 pistol you featured in your story, just wait. Someone else will come along to rip that guy’s argument apart. Unless you totally biffed on something, stick to your proverbial guns and ignore the macho knuckle-draggers trying to ruin your day.
