---
author: ["D.D. Black"]
title: "The Bones at Point No Point (A Thomas Austin Crime Thriller Book 1) - Chapter 40"
date: "2024-07-18"
description: "D.D. Black - The Bones at Point No Point (A Thomas Austin Crime Thriller Book 1)"
tags: ["boat", "home", "car", "bonner", "house", "christmas", "likely", "austin", "beach", "holiday", "new", "antonia", "launch", "would", "point", "store", "anna", "mary", "could", "big", "family", "way", "like", "want", "took"]
categories: [Mystery, Suspense, Thriller, Adult]
---

Chapter 39
CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE
Walking northwest, Austin took in the gentle curve of the beach that ran from the boat launch at Point No Point to his store. Across the Sound, beyond a lone fishing boat, the evergreens of Whidbey Island were lit by a soft golden light from the setting sun.
Something wasn’t adding up, and he needed to figure out what.
The boat launch where Anna’s car was found was about five minutes from Mary Bonner’s house on Heron Avenue. After stabbing Jimmy, she must have forced Anna into the car and ordered her at knifepoint to drive down here. Then they’d ditched the car and either found another car, proceeded by foot, or stolen a boat. Problem was, the marina was on the other side of the peninsula, two or three miles from the boat launch at Point No Point. If Bonner had been planning to steal a boat, why wouldn’t she have ditched the car at the marina, where all the boats were? The launch was for people bringing in boats from elsewhere, and in the winter that was very rare. On occasion, people left small boats unattended by the launch as they used restrooms or gathered supplies. But those were usually kayaks in the summer. No, Austin thought, she didn’t steal a boat. After ditching the car, she’d escaped in a different car, or on foot.
The setting sun disappeared behind the hill to the west and the sky took on the dark purplish color of a bruise. Tomorrow was Christmas Day, and he could see the twinkling Christmas lights of his store in the distance. Other than those lights and the mini-tree in the store, he’d barely registered the holiday. He and Fiona weren’t big into holidays, but Christmas was one they never missed. His family was small and spread out around the country, making gathering difficult, but hers was big and mostly in the northeast. She had brothers in upstate New York, a sister in Massachusetts, and parents in Connecticut, only forty minutes from New York City. Not to mention more nieces and nephews than he could count. So each Christmas meant a big gathering of Fiona’s side of the family. He’d been invited to attend this year—Fiona’s family tried hard to include him even after her death—but somehow it didn’t feel right.
When he’d caught her, Lorraine D’Antonia had told him in an interview that Christmas was her favorite holiday. He wondered whether it was Mary’s as well. Bonner was a copycat, but not a typical copycat. He was certain that Lorraine D’Antonia’s failed appeal for a new trial had brought on the killings, but they may not have been the only motive. Likely, Bonner shared much of the mindset of her twin and might be motivated by similar things.
D’Antonia had maintained all the way through her trial that she gave those children lovely holidays. She seemed to genuinely believe that dressing them up, feeding them, loving them, then butchering them was what a good parent should do. Like a lot of killers, she used her own childhood as a justification for her actions. She was deranged, yes, but Austin had never questioned her sincerity. D’Antonia genuinely believed what she said. Holidays were important to her. The same likely held true for Mary Bonner.
If so, what would she want right now? It was Christmas Eve, the day she would kill Joshua if she kept to the schedule. She’d want to move forward with that plan. When she’d fled her cabin, her plans had been disrupted. Her bag and her canning pot had been left behind. She’d want to regain that control, find a safe space. Holding Anna as a hostage, she’d want to dress Joshua up as Santa or a cute little elf, then murder him, boil him, and etch a poem onto his tiny bones. That wasn’t possible unless she found another house.
She would know that her apartment was not an option. But what about friends? Austin flashed on his conversation with Myrian Brightstone. Would Bonner show up at her house or the house of another co-worker? Not likely, even if she could get off the peninsula, which was damn near impossible with the roadblock.
The beach had been combed, the surrounding homes and even the famous lighthouse itself had been checked. Possibly she had an accomplice who was hiding her in a nearby home, but she didn’t seem to have many friends. It was also possible that she’d forced her way into a home nearby. In fact, that was the most likely option. The homes along the beach were a mix of large family homes and cute but expensive beachfront cabins. At least a handful would be vacant this time of year.
That was likely it. She’d ditched the car, wandered along the beach until she saw what looked like an empty house, then broken in, entering from the beachside. He thought of calling Ridley to see if the vacant homes had been searched but, as usual, he had no signal on the beach.
He studied the windows of the homes as he walked by. Some had big Christmas trees visible in living rooms, some were full of people cooking or playing board games. One seemed to have a holiday party in full swing. Others had drawn curtains, dark windows, their owners likely in Arizona or California, Hawaii or Las Vegas. He had to believe that Ridley and his team had checked every house.
The revelation that Mary Bonner and Lorraine D’Antonia were twins was still reorganizing all past information in his mind. He flashed on the interview that Ridley had shown him. He had to assume that, the whole time, D’Antonia had known that her sister killed Allie Shreever. It brought a chill up his spine.
Her cold, dead eyes, the way she’d insisted that she’d been a good mother to those children. The way she’d mentioned him by name. What was it she’d said? Something like, “The handsome detective moved across country, just like me. New York to Washington State, though I think his new home is likely nicer than mine.” She’d giggled after saying it, the wrinkles on her face jiggling sickeningly.
Austin stopped in his tracks.
His new home.
When she’d said it, Austin assumed she meant the town of Hansville. He’d moved to Washington state and settled in Hansville. She’d moved to Washington state and settled in prison. But what if she meant not his hometown, but his home? Bonner could have gotten his address from Anna, or perhaps the twins had somehow figured out that his apartment was connected to his business.
Then it hit him. Run’s incessant barking hadn’t been general stress. She’d been telling him that someone was inside their house.
He raised his eyes. He was a quarter mile from his store, from his house. Yanking his phone from his pocket, he took off at a full sprint down the beach.